Daily Fasting Blood Glucose Rhythm in Male Mice:
A Role of the Circadian Clock in the Liver
Hitoshi Ando, Kentaro Ushijima, Shigeki Shimba, and Akio Fujimura
Division of Clinical Pharmacology (H.A., K.U., A.F.), Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine,
Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi 329–0498, Japan; and Department of Health Science
(S.S.), School of Pharmacy, Nihon University, Funabashi, Chiba 274–8555, Japan
Fasting blood glucose (FBG) and hepatic glucose production are regulated according to a circadian
rhythm. An early morning increase in FBG levels, which is pronounced among diabetic patients, is
known as the dawn phenomenon. Although the intracellular circadian clock generates various
molecular rhythms, whether the hepatic clock is involved in FBG rhythm remains unclear. To address this issue, we investigated the effects of phase shift and disruption of the hepatic clock on the
FBG rhythm. In both C57BL/6J and diabetic ob/ob mice, FBG exhibited significant daily rhythms with
a peak at the beginning of the dark phase. Light-phase restricted feeding altered the phase of FBG
rhythm mildly in C57BL/6J mice and greatly in ob/ob mice, in concert with the phase shifts of mRNA
expression rhythms of the clock and glucose production–related genes in the liver. Moreover, the
rhythmicity of FBG and Glut2 expression was not detected in liver-specific Bmal1-deficient mice.
Furthermore, treatment with octreotide suppressed the plasma growth hormone concentration
butdidnotaffectthehepaticmRNAexpressionoftheclockgenesortheriseinFBGduringthelatter
half of the resting phase in C57BL/6J mice. These results suggest that the hepatic circadian clock
plays a critical role in regulating the daily FBG rhythm, including the dawn phenomenon.
(Endocrinology 157: 463–469, 2016)
A
n early morning increase in fasting blood glucose
(FBG) levels and/or insulin requirements is known as
the dawn phenomenon (1). This phenomenon is pronounced among type 1 diabetic patients (1), but the condition occurs also in those with type 2 diabetes (2, 3) and
in nondiabetic subjects (4). Clinical studies in the 1980s
using pharmacological inhibition suggested that GH, but
not cortisol, is responsible for the dawn phenomenon (5–
7). Another study revealed that nocturnal surges in GH
cause an increased rate of hepatic glucose production during the early morning hours by decreasing hepatic insulin
sensitivity (8).
In patients with type 2 diabetes, hepatic glucose production exhibits circadian rhythmicity, which causes daily
variation in insulin sensitivity (9). In animals, hepatic gluconeogenesis is increased at the beginning of the active
phase, consistent with elevated activity of the rate-controlling enzyme phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (10,
11). In addition, transcripts of numerous components related to glucose metabolism, including glucose 6-phosphatase and glucose transporter type 2, are expressed with
a circadian rhythm in the liver (12). Furthermore, a subset
of the clock genes that constitute the intracellular circadian pacemaker are reported to mediate gluconeogenesis
and glucose export in hepatocytes (13, 14). Collectively,
these findings suggest that a hepatic circadian clock mediates
the
circadian
regulation
of
hepatic
glucose
production.
Consistent with the rhythm of hepatic glucose production, basal (fasting) blood glucose exhibits an obvious
daily rhythm in rats with a peak at the beginning of the
active phase (15). The rhythm appears to be regulated by
the central clock residing in the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nucleus because FBG does not exhibit daily variISSN Print 0013-7227
ISSN Online 1945-7170
Printed in USA
Copyright © 2016 by the Endocrine Society
Received April 28, 2015. Accepted November 24, 2015.
First Published Online December 10, 2015
Abbreviations: BMAL1, brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1; FBG, fasting blood glucose;
ZT, Zeitgeber time.
B R I E F
R E S E A R C H
R E P O R T
doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1376
Endocrinology, February 2016, 157(2):463–469
press.endocrine.org/journal/endo
463
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 16 February 2016. at 11:07 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
ation in suprachiasmatic nucleus–lesioned rats (15). However,whetherthehepaticcircadianclockdirectlyregulates
the daily FBG rhythm and the dawn phenomenon remains
unclear. Peripheral circadian clocks, including the hepatic
clock, are controlled by the central clock, which is reset
mainly by light, whereas the hepatic clock rhythm is affected more by feeding (16, 17). Therefore, elucidating the
roles of feeding and the hepatic clock in the dawn phenomenon is important and would be clinically useful. In
the present study, we found that the daily FBG rhythms in
normal and diabetic mice are influenced by feeding time
and that the dawn phenomenon is observed in GH-suppressed mice but not in liver-specific circadian clock–disrupted mice.
Materials and Methods
Animals
The protocol for this study was approved by the Institutional
Animal Experiment Committee of Jichi Medical University. All
animal procedures were performed in accordance with the Institutional Regulation for Animal Experiments and Fundamental Guideline for Proper Conduct of Animal Experiment and
Related Activities in Academic Research Institutions under the
jurisdiction of the MEXT of Japan. All efforts were made to
minimize animal suffering.
Six-week-old male C57BL/6J and B6.V-Lepob/J (ob/ob) mice
were obtained from Charles River Japan. C57BL/6J-background,liver-specificBmal1-deficient(L-Bmal1/)andcontrol
(flox/flox) mice (18) homozygous for floxed Bmal1, with and
without Cre driven by the albumin promoter, respectively, were
bred and raised at the Center for Experimental Medicine of Jichi
Medical University. All mice were maintained under specific
pathogen-free conditions and controlled temperature and humidity with a 12:12-hour light/dark cycle and fed a regular diet
(CE-2; CLEA Japan) and water ad libitum.
Experiments
Only male mice were used in this study. Zeitgeber time (ZT)
was used to describe the experimental time with ZT 0 defined as
lights on and ZT 12 as lights off. To reduce the number of mice,
a crossover design was used in experiments 1 and 3 as described
below.
Experiment 1
Twelve-week-oldC57BL/6Jandob/obmice(eachn9)were
fastedfor24hoursfromZT0orZT12(n4and5,respectively,
for each strain). At 15 weeks of age, the mice were fasted again
for 24 hours from the other ZT. Glucose concentrations in the
blood(takenfromthetail)weremeasuredevery6hoursthroughout the fasting period using a Glutest Ace R (Sanwa Kagaku
Kenkyusyo).
Experiment 2
Twenty-four C57BL/6J mice were divided into 2 groups at 10
weeks of age. Half of the mice were given food only during the
light phase (from ZT 0 to ZT 12) and the other half were fed ad
libitum. After 14 days, the mice were fasted from ZT 12 and then
killedtoobtainliversamplesatZT18,0,6,and12.Othergroups
of 10-week-old C57BL/6J (n  9) and ob/ob mice (n  5) were
also subjected to the same 2-week time-restricted feeding regimen and then fasted for 24 hours from ZT 12 to investigate daily
FBG profiles.
Experiment 3
Twelve- to 14-week-old L-Bmal1/ (n  17) and control
(flox/flox) mice (n  15) were fasted from ZT 12 and then killed
toobtainliversamplesatZT18,0,6,and12.Toinvestigatedaily
FBG rhythms, other groups of L-Bmal1/ (n  9) and control
mice (n  5) were fasted for 24 hours twice (from ZT 0 or ZT 12)
at an interval of at least 2 weeks from 12 to 15 weeks of age.
Experiment 4
Twelve-week-old C57BL/6J mice (n  12) were divided into
2 groups, injected with 20 mg/kg octreotide (Sandostatin LAR;
Figure 1. Daily FBG profiles in mice. C57BL/6J (A and B) and ob/ob (D
and E) mice (each n  9) were fasted for 24 hours twice from ZT 0 (A
and D) or ZT 12 (B and E) in 3-week intervals. Other groups of C57BL/
6J mice (C, n  9) and ob/ob mice (F, n  5) were subjected to a 2week light-phase restricted feeding regimen and then fasted for 24
hours from ZT 12. Data represent the means and SD and were
analyzed using repeated-measures ANOVA followed by Bonferroni
post hoc testing. Different letters indicate significant differences (P 
.05) between time points. The white and black bars indicate light and
dark phases, respectively.
464
Ando et al
Daily Fasting Blood Glucose Rhythm
Endocrinology, February 2016, 157(2):463–469
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 16 February 2016. at 11:07 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
NovartisPharmaceuticalsJapan)orsalineintramuscularlyatZT
12 and then fasted for 24 hours. Blood glucose concentrations
were measured every 6 hours, and then the mice were killed to
obtain blood and liver samples at the end of the fasting period
(ZT12).ThebloodobtainedwasmixedimmediatelywithEDTA
and aprotinin, and the plasma was stored at 80°C until assayed. Plasma concentrations of GH were determined using an
ELISA kit (AKRGH-010; Shibayagi).
Real-time quantitative PCR
RNA extraction and real-time quantitative PCR were performed as described previously (19). Specific sets of primers and
TaqMan probes are reported in Supplemental Table 1.
Statistical analyses
Data are presented as means and SD. Differences between 2
datasets were analyzed using the Mann-Whitney U test, the Wilcoxon signed rank test, or the Student t
test. Daily rhythmicity was evaluated
with
repeated-measures
or
one-way
ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post
hoc testing. The calculations were performed using the SPSS software (version
16.0 J for Windows). A P value of .05
was considered to indicate statistical
significance.
Results
In this study, we defined FBG as a
blood glucose level 6 hours or longer
after the start of fasting. When fasting was started at the beginning of
the light phase, FBG levels increased
slightly during the light phase and
then decreased significantly during
the dark phase in C57BL/6J mice
(Figure 1A). In contrast, when fasting was started at the beginning of
the dark phase, FBG levels decreased
during the dark phase and continued
to increase during the following light
phase (Figure 1B). In addition, we
conducted same experiments using
obese diabetic ob/ob mice, because
they have severe insulin resistance
with marked hyperinsulinemia and
therefore exhibit large fluctuations
in
blood
glucose
concentrations
(20).
As
expected,
ob/ob
mice
showed
similar,
but
more
pronounced, daily changes in FBG (Figure 1, D and E), than C57BL/6J mice.
In both mouse strains, maximal levels of FBG were observed at the beginning of the dark phase (ie, at
“dawn” for the nocturnal animals),
regardless of the starting time of
fasting.
To examine the involvement of
the hepatic clock in the dawn phenomenon,
we
first
investigated
Figure 2. Effects of time-restricted feeding on daily mRNA expression profiles of clock (A) and
glucose production–related genes (B) in the liver of C57BL/6J mice. The intervention group (E)
was given food only during the light phase for 2 weeks, whereas the control group (F) was fed
ad libitum. These mice were fasted from ZT 12 and then killed to obtain liver samples at ZT 18, 0,
6, and 12. The data obtained by real-time PCR were analyzed using the comparative threshold
cycle method. Because the Rplp0 mRNA levels in the mice liver were not rhythmic (19), this gene
was used as an endogenous control. Data represent the means and SD of 3 mice per time point
and are expressed relative to the lowest mean value in the control group. Different letters
indicate significant differences (P  .05) between time points in each group (one-way ANOVA
followed by Bonferroni post hoc testing). *, P  .05; **, P  .01 vs the control group at each
time point (Student t test).
doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1376
press.endocrine.org/journal/endo
465
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 16 February 2016. at 11:07 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
whether time-restricted feeding influences not only the hepatic clock but also the FBG rhythm. As shown in Figure
2A, 2-week restriction of food intake to the light (resting)
phase greatly shifted the oscillation phase of hepatic
mRNA expression of all of the clock genes examined in
C57BL/6J mice under a ZT 12–started fasting condition.
In addition, this feeding condition appeared to affect the
mRNA expression rhythms of the glucose production–
related molecules, although the rhythmicity of the genes
other than Glut2 was not statistically significant probably
due to the small number of animals (Figure 2B). FBG
dropped to lower levels during the latter half of the light
phase in time-restricted–fed mice (Figure 1C), in contrast
to the result in control mice (Figure 1B). Moreover, in
ob/ob mice, the acrophase was obviously shifted from the
beginning of the dark phase (Figure 1E) to the beginning
of the light phase (Figure 1F).
Next, we investigated the daily FBG rhythm in mice
with liver-specific deletion of brain
and
muscle
Arnt-like
protein-1
(BMAL1), the core and essential
component of the intracellular circadian clock (21). As expected, this deletion did not influence the daily
feeding rhythm (Supplemental Figure 1) but significantly affected the
rhythmic mRNA expression of the
clock genes, especially Bmal1 and
Dbp, in the liver of mice even under
a ZT 12–started fasting condition
(Figure 3A). Moreover, consistent
with previous results in fed mice
(13), daily Glut2 rhythm disappeared in L-Bmal1/ mice (Figure
3B). Similar to C57BL/6J mice (Figure 1, A and B), control (flox/flox)
mice exhibited significant fluctuations in FBG in both ZT 0–started
and ZT 12–started fasting trials (Figure
4,
A
and
B).
Conversely,
L-Bmal1/ mice did not generate
any 24-hour rhythmicity in FBG
(Figure 4, A and B). These results
clearly suggest that the hepatic clock
is involved in the daily FBG rhythm.
Because nocturnal secretion of
GH is thought to cause the dawn
phenomenon in humans (6, 8), we
further investigated the effect of octreotide-suppressed GH on elevated
FBG
levels
in
C57BL/6J
mice.
Plasma GH concentrations were
suppressedsubstantially24hoursafter the octreotide administration at
ZT 12 (Supplemental Figure 2).
Conversely, hepatic mRNA expression of the clock and glucose production-related genes was not affected
by this treatment (Supplemental Table2).Bloodglucoselevelsdecreased
during the dark phase (ZT 12–ZT 0)
Figure 3. Effects of liver-specific disruption of Bmal1 on daily mRNA expression profiles of clock
(A) and glucose production–related genes (B) in mouse livers. L-Bmal1/ (E) and control (flox/
flox) mice (F) were fasted from ZT 12 and then killed to obtain liver samples at ZT 18, 0, 6, and
12. The data obtained by real-time PCR were analyzed using the comparative threshold cycle
method with Rplo0 as an endogenous control. Data represent the means and SD of 3 to 5 mice
per time point and are expressed relative to the lowest mean value in the control group.
Different letters indicate significant differences (P  .05) between time points in each group
(one-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post hoc testing). *, P  .05; **, P  .01 vs the control
group at each time point (Student t test).
466
Ando et al
Daily Fasting Blood Glucose Rhythm
Endocrinology, February 2016, 157(2):463–469
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 16 February 2016. at 11:07 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
after the start of fasting and the injection in both octreotide- and vehicle-treated mice (data not shown). In the
control group, FBG levels significantly increased from ZT
6 to ZT 12 (Supplemental Figure 3A), similar to those in
nontreated mice (Figure 1A). Notably, FBG concentrations were also elevated at the beginning of the active
phaseinallthemicetreatedwithoctreotide(Supplemental
Figure 3B). Thus, the dawn phenomenon in the present
model was detected even under the GH-suppressed
condition.
Discussion
Consistent with previous findings in rats (15), basal blood
glucose exhibited daily rhythmicity with a peak at the beginning of the active phase using the simple mouse model
used in this study. In this model, mice were fasted for 24
hours, but no mice exhibited severe hypoglycemia (blood
glucose level of 3.0 mmol/L) throughout the experiments. Specifically, the FBG trough levels in ob/ob mice
were 7 mmol/L. Therefore, posthypoglycemic hyperglycemia was probably not involved in increased blood glucose levels in this model. Conversely, the hepatic intracellular clock may play a role in the fluctuation of FBG
because L-Bmal1/ mice did not exhibit such rhythmicity. Previous (13, 18) and present studies (Supplemental
Figure 1) showed that L-Bmal1/ mice exhibit normal
circadian rhythmicity of both locomotor activity and feeding behavior, suggesting that the function of the central
clock is intact. Thus, the present study provides further
evidence of the crucial role of the hepatic clock in regulating glucose metabolism.
In humans, the dawn phenomenon is caused by increased hepatic glucose production during the early morning hours (8). In this study, elevated FBG levels were observed at the beginning of the active phase in both normal
and diabetic mice fed ad libitum. In addition, the rising
phase of FBG was shifted by the time-restricted feeding
procedure, consistent with the alteration of mRNA expression rhythmicity of the glucose production-related
molecules. Furthermore, in L-Bmal1/ mice, the temporary increase in FBG levels disappeared, in concert with
thedisruptedexpressionrhythmicityofGLUT2,themajor
glucose transporter of hepatocytes. Based on these results,
elevatedbloodglucoselevelsobservedinthismousemodel
were considered the dawn phenomenon. Interestingly, the
influence of the time-restricted feeding on FBG rhythm
was mild in normal mice, compared with that in diabetic
mice (Figure 1). This may suggest that some factors such
as insulin sensitivity in the muscle and adipose tissues
modify the FBG rhythm driven by the hepatic clock.
In patients with type 1 diabetes, suppression of nocturnal spikes of GH secretion by somatostatin results in the
disappearance of the dawn phenomenon (6, 8). In contrast, in the present study, treatment with a somatostatin
analog did not inhibit the rise of glucose levels in male
mice. Reportedly, GH levels are higher during the light
phase than during the dark phase in female mice, but similardailyrhythmicitycannotbedetectedinmalemice(22).
Collectively, these findings suggest that the dawn phenomenon occurs even in the absence of GH surges during
the resting phase, at least in male mice. Nevertheless, because somatostatin suppresses not only GH secretion but
Figure 4. Daily FBG profiles in control and L-Bmal1/ mice. Control
(F; n  5) and L-Bmal1/ mice (E; n  9) were fasted for 24 hours
twice from ZT 0 (A) or ZT 12 (B) at an interval of at least 2 weeks. Data
represent the means and SD and were analyzed using repeatedmeasures ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post hoc testing. Different
letters indicate significant differences (P  .05) between time points in
each group. **, P  .01 vs the control group at each time point.
doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1376
press.endocrine.org/journal/endo
467
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 16 February 2016. at 11:07 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
also the secretion of various other hormones, including
insulin and glucagon (23), close attention is required to
interprettheresultsofstudiesusingasomatostatinanalog.
Further studies are needed to clarify the mechanism underlying the discrepancy between the results obtained in
human and animal studies.
Inthepresentstudy,time-restrictedfeedingaffectednot
only the daily hepatic expression rhythms of the clock
genesbutalsotheFBGlevelsinmice.Consequently,eating
habits could possibly affect the dawn phenomenon in humans, especially in diabetic patients. Studies on mice have
shown that the hepatic clock phase is affected by both the
amount of food and the interval between feeding time
points (24). In addition, food composition determines the
degree of food entrainment of the hepatic clock (25).
Therefore, skipping breakfast, night eating, and/or a severelyunbalanceddietmightaffectthedawnphenomenon
in humans. Hopefully, these possibilities will be examined
inthenearfuture,becausecontinuousglucosemonitoring,
which detects the dawn phenomenon even in patients with
type 2 diabetes (26), is commonly used.
In conclusion, FBG exhibited an obvious 24-hour
rhythm with a peak near the beginning of the active phase
in mice. This rhythm, including the temporal rise corresponding to the dawn phenomenon, was altered in concert
with the phase shift of the hepatic clock in time-restricted
feeding mice and was not detected in liver-specific clockdisrupted mice. Because these results suggest that the hepatic clock plays a critical role in generating rhythmicity of
basal blood glucose, further clinical studies are needed to
explore the relationship in diabetic patients.
Acknowledgments
We thank Hisae Shiokawa, Michiyo Yoshioka, and Naho Nakazawa for their technical assistance.
Address all correspondence and requests for reprints to: Hitoshi Ando, MD, PhD, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Jichi Medical
University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi 329–0498, Japan. E-mail:
h-ando@jichi.ac.jp.
This work was supported by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science [Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (C)
24590666] and the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan (Program for the Strategic Research Foundation at Private Universities 2011–2015 “Cooperative Basic and Clinical Research on Circadian Medicine”
S1101022).
Disclosure Summary: The authors have nothing to disclose.
