26. I. Provencio, H. M. Cooper, R. G. Foster, J. Comp.
Neurol. 395, 417 (1998).
27. J. Hannibal et al., J. Neurosci. 17, 2637 (1997).
28. J. Hannibal, M. Moller, O. P. Ottersen, J. Fahrenkrug,
J. Comp. Neurol. 418, 147 (2000).
29. J. J. Gooley, J. Lu, T. C. Chou, T. E. Scammell, C. B.
Saper, Nature Neurosci. 4, 1165 (2001).
30. J. Hannibal, P. Hindersson, S. M. Knudsen, B. Georg, J.
Fahrenkrug, J. Neurosci. 22, 1 (RC191) (2002).
31. G. E. Pickard, Neurosci. Lett. 55, 211 (1985).
32. M. E. Harrington, Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 21, 705
(1997).
33. L. J. Trejo, C. M. Cicerone, Brain Res. 300, 49 (1984).
34. R. J. Clarke, H. Ikeda, Exp. Brain Res. 57, 224 (1985).
35. Single-letter abbreviations for the amino acid residues are as follows: A, Ala; C, Cys; D, Asp; E, Glu; F,
Phe; G, Gly; H, His; I, Ile; K, Lys; L, Leu; M, Met; N, Asn;
P, Pro; Q, Gln; R, Arg; S, Ser; T, Thr; V, Val; W, Trp; and
Y, Tyr.
36. D. G. Green, N. V. Kapousta-Bruneau, Vis. Neurosci.
16, 727 (1999).
37. F. A. Dunn, personal communication.
38. We thank R. R. Reed, and S. S. Wang and H. Zhao
in his laboratory, for the tau-lacZ construct and
invaluable advice. We also thank I. Provencio for
providing the melanopsin BAC clone, J. Nathans
and H. Sun for discussions, K. Takamiya, Y. Zhang,
S. A. Ralls, M. Dehoff, B. E. Lonze, and especially M.
Cowan and the Johns Hopkins Transgenic Facility
for technical help/advice in the generation of the
tau-lauZ knock-in mice as well as providing the ES
cells. We are grateful to R. Richardson and S.
Carlson for technical assistance with the experiments on colocalization of melanopsin and intrinsic photic sensitivity. Finally, we thank R. Masland
and members of the Yau laboratory, especially J.
Bradley, W.-H. Xiong, and H. Zhong, for help/
critique on the experiments. This work was supported by grants from the U.S. National Eye Institute to D.M.B. and K.-W.Y.
7 January 2002; accepted 11 January 2002
Phototransduction by Retinal
Ganglion Cells That Set the
Circadian Clock
David M. Berson,* Felice A. Dunn,† Motoharu Takao†
Light synchronizes mammalian circadian rhythms with environmental time by
modulating retinal input to the circadian pacemaker—the suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN) of the hypothalamus. Such photic entrainment requires neither
rods nor cones, the only known retinal photoreceptors. Here, we show that
retinal ganglion cells innervating the SCN are intrinsically photosensitive. Unlike other ganglion cells, they depolarized in response to light even when all
synaptic input from rods and cones was blocked. The sensitivity, spectral tuning,
and slow kinetics of this light response matched those of the photic entrainment
mechanism, suggesting that these ganglion cells may be the primary photoreceptors for this system.
The SCN is the circadian pacemaker of the
mammalian brain, driving daily cycles in activity, hormonal levels, and other physiological variables. Light can phase-shift the endogenous oscillator in the SCN, synchronizing it with the environmental day-night cycle.
This process, the photic entrainment of circadian rhythms, originates in the eye and involves a direct axonal pathway from a small
fraction of retinal ganglion cells to the SCN
(1–3). A striking feature of this neural circuit
is its apparent independence from conventional retinal phototransduction. In functionally blind transgenic mice lacking virtually
all known photoreceptors (rods and cones),
photic entrainment persists with undiminished sensitivity (4). Candidate photoreceptors for this system are nonrod, noncone retinal neurons, including some ganglion cells,
that contain novel opsins or cryptochromes
(5–8).
To determine whether retinal ganglion
cells innervating the SCN are capable of phototransduction, we labeled them in the rat
retina by retrograde transport of fluorescent
microspheres injected into the hypothalamus
(9). In isolated retinas, whole-cell recordings
were made of the responses of labeled ganglion cells to light (10) (Fig. 1, A to E). In
most of these cells (n 5 150), light evoked
large depolarizations with superimposed fast
action potentials (Fig. 1, E to G) (11). The
light response persisted during bath application of 2 mM cobalt chloride (Fig. 1F; n 5
42), which blocks calcium-mediated synaptic
release from rods, cones, and other retinal
neurons (12). In contrast, other ganglion cells
prepared and recorded under identical conditions but not selectively labeled from the
SCN (control cells) lacked detectable response to light even without synaptic blockade (47/50 cells; Fig. 1, I and J) (13). This is
presumably because rod and cone photopigments were extensively bleached (10). A few
control cells (3/50) exhibited weak, evanescent responses to light, but these were abolished by bath-applied cobalt (n 5 2).
To ensure blockade of conventional synaptic influences from rods and cones, we
supplemented cobalt with a mixture of drugs
that independently disrupted both the glutamatergic synapses crucial to vertical signal
transfer through the retina and the ionotropic
receptors responsible for most inhibitory influences on ganglion cells (14). Robust light
responses persisted in SCN-projecting ganglion cells under these conditions (Fig. 1G;
n 5 7). Furthermore, the somata of these
ganglion cells exhibited photosensitivity even
when completely detached from the retina by
microdissection (Fig. 1H; n 5 3). These light
responses were not an artifact of photic excitation of either of the intracellular fluorophores we used, as the action spectrum of the
light response (Fig. 2C) differed from the
absorption spectra of both the retrograde tracer and Lucifer Yellow (LY) used for intracellular staining. Also, light-evoked increases in
spike frequency were detectable in extracellular recordings, before patch rupture and LY
dye filling (n 5 5). Whole-cell recordings
revealed normal light responses when LY
was omitted from the internal solution (n 5
8). In contrast, control cells lacked cobaltresistant light responses even when labeled
with both fluorescent beads and LY (n 5 12;
Fig. 1I). These data indicate that retinal ganglion cells innervating the SCN are intrinsically photosensitive.
To determine if these cells could serve as
the primary photoreceptors for circadian entrainment, we assessed congruence between
their photic properties and those of the entrainment mechanism. The responses of a single cell
to narrow-band stimuli of various intensities
showed that at each wavelength, peak depolarization increased with stimulus energy (Fig. 2,
A and B). Intensity-response curves exhibited a
consistent slope when plotted in semilogarithmic coordinates (Fig. 2B), as expected for responses mediated by a single photopigment
(principle of univariance). The horizontal displacements of the curves from one another reflect the spectral dependence of the pigment’s
quantum efficiency and yield the spectral sensitivity function shown in Fig. 2C (red curve).
Other cells exhibited similar action spectra (Fig.
2C, green curve) (15). These action spectra
closely matched that predicted for a retinal1based pigment with peak sensitivity at 484 nm
(Fig. 2C, black). They also resemble action
spectra derived behaviorally for circadian entrainment in rodents (16, 17), as expected if
these ganglion cells function as primary
circadian
photoreceptors
(18).
Judging
from available spectral evidence, the photopigment in these ganglion cells is more
likely to be a retinaldehyde-based opsin
such as melanopsin (5, 19, 20) than a flavin-based cryptochrome (21).
Department of Neuroscience, Brown University, Providence, RI, 02912 USA.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: David_Berson@brown.edu
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
R E P O R T S
8 FEBRUARY 2002
VOL 295
SCIENCE
www.sciencemag.org
1070
on January 23, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
The threshold and dynamic range of the
light response in these ganglion cells were
also similar to those of the entrainment mechanism. Threshold retinal irradiance for a fullfield stimulus was about 5 3 1011 photons
s21 cm22 at 500 nm (;lmax; n 5 3) . This
corresponds to an in vivo corneal irradiance
of ;2 3 1013 photons s21 cm22, comparable
to thresholds for circadian phase shifts in
rodents (;1010 to 1013 photons s21 cm22 at
500 nm) (22–24) and to ocular illumination
by the dawn sky. Response saturation in photosensitive ganglion cells occurred at irradiances ;3 logarithmic units above threshold
(Figs. 2B and 3C), matching the dynamic
range of entrainment behavior (16, 23, 24)
and many SCN neurons [(25), but see (26)].
The circadian entrainment mechanism integrates light energy over very long time
scales, exhibits little adaptation, and responds
poorly to brief stimuli (24, 27). Similar features were evident in the behavior of photosensitive ganglion cells. Constant illumination depolarized cells tonically and elevated
spike frequency, and the amount of depolarization was monotonically related to stimulus
energy (Fig. 3). Response kinetics were much
slower than typical for ganglion cells. Latencies to response onset (Vm . 3 standard deviations above baseline) were typically several seconds and ranged from several hundred
milliseconds for saturating stimuli (Figs. 1F
and 2A) to ;1 min near threshold (Fig. 3B,
bottom trace). Latencies from stimulus onset
to peak depolarization were typically 10 to
20 s (range: ;2 s to 2 min) and inversely
Fig. 1. Labeling and light responses of rat ganglion cells innervating the SCN. (A) Fluorescence
photomicrograph showing deposit (white arrow) of mixed red and green ﬂuorescent microspheres
(appears as yellow) in the SCN. The red arrows mark boundaries of contralateral SCN. Acridine
orange was used for green ﬂuorescent Nissl counterstain. ox, optic chiasm; III, third ventricle. Scale
bar, 500 mm. (B) Two ganglion cells back-ﬁlled from the SCN, photographed in whole mount with
rhodamine ﬁlter set to show retrograde labeling. The cell at right was patched and recorded. Scale
bar, 20 mm. (C) Same cells viewed under blue excitation, to show LY ﬁlling of the recorded cell. (D)
Camera lucida drawing of cell ﬁlled in (C), as viewed in the whole mount after antibody to LY
immunostaining (35). Scale bar, 100 mm. (E) Strong depolarization and fast action potentials
evoked in this cell (D) by a light pulse indicated by step in horizontal line below. (F to H) Evidence
for the intrinsic photosensitivity of ganglion cells selectively retrolabeled from the SCN. (F and G)
The light response apparent in control Ames solution (black traces) persisted during bath application of 2 mM CoCl2 (red traces) either alone (F) or in combination with a drug mixture blocking
ionotropic and metabotropic glutamate receptors as well as ionotropic GABA and glycine receptors
(G) (14). The absence of evoked spikes during drug application probably reﬂects depolarization
block (tonic sodium channel inactivation) because weaker stimuli evoked spikes (40). (H) Light
response recorded from the isolated soma of a ganglion cell retrolabeled from the SCN. The cell
body was bathed in an enzyme solution (papain, ;20 units/ml) with a puffer pipette and then
mechanically removed from the retina with an empty patch pipette under visual control, amputating its dendrites and axon. (I and J) Control recordings from a conventional ganglion cell (Fig. 4C)
labeled nonselectively by a deposit of rhodamine beads in the optic chiasm and ﬁlled with LY. Light
evoked no detectable response (I), although synaptic transmission was not blocked and responses
to current injection were normal (J) (150 pA). Retinal irradiance of stimuli (in photons s21 cm22):
(E) 7 3 1012, (F) 2.6 3 1013, (G) 7.2 3 1012, (H) ;1 3 1013, and (I) ..9 3 1013. Stimuli in (E),
(F), and (G) were 500 nm.
Fig. 2. Spectral tuning of light response in
photosensitive ganglion cells. (A) Voltage responses of a single cell to a 500-nm narrowband stimulus at indicated intensities (in log10
photons s21 cm22). Baseline ; 260 mV for
each trace. (B) Plots of peak depolarization as a
function of log retinal irradiance for each of
several narrow-band spectral lights (400- to
600-nm wavelength, as indicated; 10-nm width
at half height); same cell as in (A). Peak was
obtained from a 1-s boxcar average of raw
voltages. (C) Spectral sensitivity functions derived for photosensitive ganglion cells from relative displacements of intensity-response functions along the abscissa in (B). Red curve: same
cell as in (A) and (B). Green curve: group data
for all cells (n 5 34; number of cells tested per
wavelength as follows: 400 nm, 5; 420 nm, 3;
440 nm, 2; 460 nm, 4; 480 nm, 4; 500 nm, 34;
520 nm, 7; 540 nm, 5; 570 nm, 2; and 600 nm,
2). Black curve: nomogram for retinal1-based
photopigment with lmax of 484 nm (41), ﬁt by
least squares method to the group data.
R E P O R T S
www.sciencemag.org
SCIENCE
VOL 295
8 FEBRUARY 2002
1071
on January 23, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
related to stimulus energy. Repolarization after intense stimuli required several minutes
and was sometimes punctuated by spontaneous depolarizations and spike bursts lasting
up to a minute each (Fig. 3B).
Photosensitive ganglion cells shared a common morphology (Fig. 4, A and B), as revealed
by intracellular staining with LY (28). Somata
were intermediate in diameter among neurons
of the ganglion cell layer (14.7 6 1.2 mm,
mean 6 SD; n 5 18). Many cells sent an axon
into the optic fiber layer; those lacking one had
presumably lost it during mechanical exposure
of the soma before recording. The sparsely
branching, tortuous dendrites of these cells arborized primarily in the outer part (OFF sublayer) of the inner plexiform layer (IPL; Fig.
4B). Although some dendrites coursed within
the inner IPL (ON sublayer) for 100 to 200 mm,
nearly all terminated in the OFF sublayer. Such
stratification is highly unusual for ganglion
cells depolarized by light [but see (29, 30)].
Dendritic fields were large (diameter 497 6
115 mm; mean 6 SD; n 5 21). Stimuli illuminating the dendrites but not the soma consistently evoked light responses (31). Control
cells, which lacked cobalt-resistant light responses, had markedly different dendritic morphology (e.g., Fig. 4C).
These data identify a distinct ganglion cell
type in the mammalian retina with characteristic dendritic profile and stratification pattern, extraordinarily sluggish and tonic light
responses encoding ambient light level, and
axonal projections to the SCN. The most
striking feature of this cell type, however, is
its apparent capacity for intrinsic phototransduction. The correspondences between the
photic properties of these cells and those of
the entrainment mechanism suggest that these
unconventional ganglion cells may represent
the primary photoreceptors for synchronizing
the circadian clock to environmental time.
Melanopsin (5, 7) is probably the photopigment responsible for the intrinsic sensitivity of
these cells to light, as it is selectively expressed
in the small subset of ganglion cells that are
intrinsically photosensitive and innervate the
SCN (32, 33). In amphibians, certain nonretinal
cells contain melanopsin, and these cells, too,
are photosensitive, with action spectra resembling those of photosensitive rat ganglion cells
(Fig. 2C) (5, 19, 20). Melanopsin exhibits
marked sequence similarity to invertebrate
opsins (5, 7), which, unlike vertebrate opsins,
retain
their
photoisomerized
retinaldehyde
chromophore and typically trigger depolarizing
light responses when activated. These properties may help to explain why photosensitive
ganglion cells differ from conventional retinal
photoreceptors in their response polarity and
lack of dependence on the pigment epithelium.
Cryptochromes, blue-light–absorbing, flavinbased pigments, have been proposed as circadian photopigments (8), but spectral evidence
(Fig. 2C) (21) weighs against their mediating
the light response in intrinsically photosensitive
ganglion cells.
Note added in proof: Further evidence for
the presence of melanopsin in ganglion cells
innervating the SCN has emerged (34).
