8. von Segesser LK, Tkebuchava T, Niederhäuser U, et al.
Aortobronchial and aortoesophageal ﬁstulae as risk factors in
surgery of descending thoracic aortic aneurysms. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 1997;12:195–201.
Fatal Esophageal Perforation
Caused by Invasive Candidiasis
Michael Gock, MD, Markus Schäfer, MD,
Aurel Perren, MD, Nicolas Demartines, MD, and
Pierre-Alain Clavien, MD, PhD
Departments of Visceral and Transplantation Surgery, and
Pathology, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland
Instrumental lesions, spontaneous rupture, and trauma
cause most esophageal perforations. Transmural fungal
infection is extremely rare, although Candida may be
detected in as many as 25% of normal esophagus. In this
report we present a case of fatal esophageal perforation
due to transmural Candida infection in a 76-year-old
woman. The patient died from septic shock and multiorgan failure, despite esophageal resection and systemic
antifungal therapy. Pathogenetic aspects and treatment
strategies are discussed.
(Ann Thorac Surg 2005;80:1120–2)
© 2005 by The Society of Thoracic Surgeons
E
sophageal perforation is an uncommon clinical entity, which is associated with increased morbidity
and mortality rates [1]. Among different reasons that may
lead to esophageal perforation, transmural Candida infection of the esophageus is extremely rare. We could only
identify four cases in current English literature.
Particularly characterized by its ability to survive in
distinct anatomical sites, Candida albicans mucositis of the
gastrointestinal and urogenital tract is further facilitated
by changes of a host immunity (eg, depletion of CD4
leukocytes in patients with AIDS) [2]. Immunosuppression regimen after organ transplantation and prolonged
stay in intensive care units due to major surgery particularly promote Candida infection of the esophagointestinal mucosa [3].
We report a case of fatal esophageal perforation as a
sequel of transmural esophageal Candida infection in a
woman with a symptomatic paraesophageal hernia.
A 76-year-old woman had been treated as in-hospital
patient for actinic skin lesions that occurred after radiation therapy for vaginal carcinoma, when she had acute
left-sided chest pain and shortness of breath develop.
Coronary heart disease, mild impairment of renal function, and ileocecal resection for small bowel carcinoma
were preexisting comorbidities.
Chest roentgenogram revealed left pleural effusion
and pulmonary inﬁltration, as well as an enlarged mediastinum. Cardiac ischemia was suspected because of
electrocardiographic changes, whereas laboratory ﬁndings were all within normal ranges, particularly troponin
and D-dimer. Empirical antibiotic treatment was started
without further investigations, and the patient slightly
improved during the following 2 days. Then the patient
became rapidly septic with cardiopulmonary disturbances, increasing pain, and C-reactive protein (CRP)
levels. Computed tomographic scan of the thorax demonstrated a seropneumothorax and extensive left-sided
pulmonary atelectasis formation. In addition, multiple
mediastinal air bubbles and a large paraesophageal hernia were detected (Fig 1).
The patient underwent emergency surgical exploration
by a median upper laparotomy. Intraoperatively, a 4-cm
longitudinal opening of the distal esophagus was detected that had induced extensive necrosis formation in
the posterior mediastinum. Due to the advanced inﬂammatory changes, esophageal resection and mediastinal
drainage were performed through an additional right
anterior thoracotomy. A right-sided descending aorta
further complicated the operation. Restoration of gastrointestinal continuity was achieved by creating a gastric
tube vascularized by the right gastroepiploic artery that
was connected with the proximal esophagus in the upper
mediastinum. The postoperative course was severely
protracted by the ongoing sepsis and development of a
multiorgan failure. The patient never recovered and died
on postoperative day 17.
Histologic examination of the specimen revealed transmural ulceration at the esophagogastric junction with
concomitant severe mediastinitis. Within that ulceration,
large masses of fungal hyphal elements were found (Fig
2). Additional microbiological analysis identiﬁed C. albicans and Candida norvegensis. These Candida species were
also detected in the sputum, vagina, and pleural cavities.
Comment
Candida represents a commensal fungus of different mucous membranes in healthy individuals. The esophagus
is colonized in as much as 25% of normal individuals [4].
However, invasive infections causing extensive tissue
necrosis and ulceration predominantly occur in immunocompromised patients after major surgical procedures
or prolonged intensive care unit stays, and also in patients with organ transplantations [3]. It has only been
partially elucidated which factors may contribute to promote progression from simple colonization to invasive
disease [5]. Competent T-cell immune response is a
crucial protecting mechanism against cutaneous, vaginal,
and oral Candidiasis in patients with AIDS who are
known to develop oral Candidiasis in as much as 70% [6].
Resistance to systemic fungal infection is closely associated with normal mononuclear phagocytes and neutrophil response [5]. Moreover, it has been hypothesized
that depending on speciﬁc preexisting host deﬁciencies,
different forms of Candidiasis may occur. The invasiveAccepted for publication Feb 20, 2004.
Address reprint requests to Dr Clavien, Department of Visceral and
Transplantation Surgery, University of Zürich, Rämistr 100, Zürich 8091,
Switzerland; e-mail: pierre-alain.clavien@usz.ch.
1120
CASE REPORT
GOCK ET AL
Ann Thorac Surg
FATAL ESOPHAGEAL PERFORATION
2005;80:1120–2
© 2005 by The Society of Thoracic Surgeons
0003-4975/05/$30.00
Published by Elsevier Inc
doi:10.1016/j.athoracsur.2004.02.147
FEATURE ARTICLES
ness of different Candida strains induces various types of
diseases and host responses accordingly [2, 5].
Transmural invasive Candida infection remains an extremely rare cause of esophagointestinal perforation. By
thoroughly reviewing the current English literature, we
could only ﬁnd 4 patients with esophageal perforation
that were histologically conﬁrmed to be caused by transmural Candida infection [7, 8]. Jones and colleagues [8]
reported severe necrotizing Candida esophagitis in 2
insulin-dependent diabetic patients after renal transplantation. The ﬁrst patient was a 34-year-old woman
who died 6 months after transplantation. She had ulcerative Candida esophagitis develop 2 weeks postoperatively. Despite amphotericin B treatment she had an
esophagomediastinal ﬁstula develop, and she died after
sudden massive hematemesis. Autopsy disclosed a ruptured mycotic aneurysmal of a peripheral pulmonary
artery. The second patient was a 40-year-old human who
had characteristic Candida esophagitis develop 35 days
after transplantation. An esophagram taken 66 days after
the operation showed a ﬁstula between the esophagus
and the main stem of the left bronchus. Despite treatment with amphotericin B, decompressive gastrostomy,
esophagostomy above the ﬁstula, and dissection below
the ﬁstula, the patient became septic and died 3 months
after transplantation. An autopsy showed a septal myocardial infarction as the cause of death [8]. Both patients
developed invasive Candida esophagitis in the early posttransplant course. Despite prophylactic oral nystatin
treatment, esophageal perforation could not be
prevented.
Another two cases of nonfatal esophageal perforation
related to invasive Candidiasis were reported by Gaissert
and colleagues [7]. The ﬁrst patient (a 10-year-old boy
with Down syndrome) underwent chemotherapy for
acute B-cell lymphocytic leukemia when he had esophageal necrosis develop. The second patient (a 27-year-old
autistic human) underwent diagnostic esophagogastroscopy for esophageal Candidiasis. Delayed perforation of
the esophageal wall occurred 3 months later at the biopsy
location. Emergency esophagectomy and cervical
esophagostomy were performed. Moreover, systemic antifungal therapy was started. Both patients survived and
revealed a good long-term outcome after restoration of
gastrointestinal continuity by using a gastric conduit.
In our patient, a preexisting esophageal colonization
with Candida can be assumed. Temporary incarceration
of the paraesophageal hernia probably caused a mucosal
damage at the gastroesophageal junction. Transmural
ulceration by invasive Candidiasis was therefore facilitated by the impaired mucosal defense. At the time of
delayed diagnosis, esophageal perforation was advanced
and extensive mediastinitis was already established.
Successful treatment of invasive Candida infection
complicated by esophageal perforation requires both
long-term systemic antifungal therapy and emergency
surgical intervention. Surgery must include esophageal
resection, extensive necrosectomy, and drainage of the
pleural cavities and mediastinum. Correction of the patient’s immunosuppressive drugs should be attempted.
Because there are only a very few cases that have been
reported so far, no established treatment regimen has
been validated and long-term outcome probably remains
poor.
In conclusion, esophageal perforation due to invasive
Candidiasis is an extremely rare complication, although
its true incidence may be underestimated. Despite aggressive medical and surgical treatment, the patient’s
prognosis remains poor.
