Reciprocal Regulation of Brain and Muscle ArntLike Protein 1 and Peroxisome ProliferatorActivated Receptor  Defines a Novel Positive
Feedback Loop in the Rodent Liver Circadian Clock
Laurence Canaple, Juliette Rambaud, Ouria Dkhissi-Benyahya, Be´ atrice Rayet, Nguan Soon Tan,
Liliane Michalik, Franck Delaunay, Walter Wahli, and Vincent Laudet
Structure and Evolution of Nuclear Receptors (L.C., J.R., V.L.), Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (CNRS) Unite´ Mixte de Recherche 5161, Institut Fe´ de´ ratif de Recherche (IFR) 128
BioSciences Lyon-Gerland, Laboratoire de Biologie Mole´ culaire de la Cellule, Ecole Normale
Supe´ rieure, 69364 Lyon cedex 07, France; Institut National de la Sante´ et de la Recherche Me´ dicale
Unite´ 371 (O.D.-B.), Laboratoire Cerveau et Vision, IFR 19-Universite´ Claude Bernard Lyon 1, 69675
Bron, France; Universite´ de Nice Sophia Antipolis CNRS Formation de Recherche en Evolution (B.R.,
F.D.), 06108 Nice cedex 2, France; and Center for Integrative Genomics (N.S.T., L.M., W.W.),
University of Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
Recent evidence has emerged that peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor  (PPAR), which is
largely involved in lipid metabolism, can play an
important role in connecting circadian biology and
metabolism. In the present study, we investigated
the mechanisms by which PPAR influences the
pacemakers acting in the central clock located in
the suprachiasmatic nucleus and in the peripheral
oscillator of the liver. We demonstrate that PPAR
plays a specific role in the peripheral circadian
control because it is required to maintain the circadian rhythm of the master clock gene brain and
muscle Arnt-like protein 1 (bmal1) in vivo. This regulation occurs via a direct binding of PPAR on a
potential PPAR response element located in the
bmal1 promoter. Reversely, BMAL1 is an upstream
regulator of PPAR gene expression. We further
demonstrate that fenofibrate induces circadian
rhythm of clock gene expression in cell culture
and up-regulates hepatic bmal1 in vivo. Together,
these results provide evidence for an additional
regulatory feedback loop involving BMAL1 and
PPAR in peripheral clocks. (Molecular Endocrinology 20: 1715–1727, 2006)
C
IRCADIAN RHYTHMS ENABLE numerous organisms to adapt to daily environmental changes
such as light, temperature, and social communication
and serve to synchronize multiple molecular, biochemical, physiological, and behavioral processes.
Circadian rhythms persist with an approximate 24-h
periodicity even in temporally isolated subjects, indicating the presence of an autonomous time-keeping
system called circadian clock. In mammals, circadian
rhythms are generated by the main pacemaker located
in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the hypothalamus (1). To ensure that internal time coincides with
environmental time, the clock must be adjusted, a
process known as entrainment. In mammals, light received by the eyes synchronizes the oscillator through
the retino-hypothalamic tract and hence synchronizes
the behavior of the organism with the daily 24-h lightdark (LD) cycle (for review, see Refs. 2–6).
In addition to the SCN, other peripheral tissues such
as liver, heart, kidney (7, 8), as well as isolated cells (9)
express clock genes giving rise to circadian rhythms
with a different phase from that observed in the SCN.
Interestingly, these peripheral clocks can be resetted
by alternative routes independently of the SCN, for
example by forced change of feeding time (10, 11).
Several lines of evidence suggest that the peripheral
circadian clocks are not SCN independent but require
inputs from the SCN to drive the rhythmicity and ensure an ordered response of the organism to environmental changes (12, 13). Thus, the SCN is believed to
coordinate rhythms in the brain and body via a combination of neural and humoral diffusible and synaptic
signals (7, 14, 15).
Genetic analyses have identified master clock genes
such as clock, bmal1, period (per1, 2), and cryptochrome genes (cry1, 2), as well as the orphan nuclear
receptor genes, rev-erb and ror (16, 17). Other transcription factors functioning in the circadian regulation
of gene expression, including DBP-related factors
First Published Online March 23, 2006
Abbreviations: BMAL1, Brain and muscle Arnt-like protein
1; ChIP, chromatin immunoprecipitation; CT, circadian time;
DD, constant darkness; LD, light-dark; 12L:12D, 12-h light,
12-h dark; PPAR, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor ; PPRE, peroxisome proliferator response element; PSG,
penicillin/streptomycin/glutamine; SCN, suprachiasmatic nucleus; WT, wild type; ZT, Zeitgeber time.
Molecular Endocrinology is published monthly by The
Endocrine
Society
(http://www.endo-society.org),
the
foremost professional society serving the endocrine
community.
0888-8809/06/$15.00/0
Molecular Endocrinology 20(8):1715–1727
Printed in U.S.A.
Copyright © 2006 by The Endocrine Society
doi: 10.1210/me.2006-0052
1715
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 09 June 2015. at 04:57 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
(18), Rev-erb, ROR and - (19) have also been identified. The clock mechanism mainly involves an integrated network of interacting self-sustained transcriptional-translational
feedback
loops,
composed
of
positive and negative regulators, which drive their own
rhythmic expression and the one of clock-controlled
genes to perform a fine tuning of circadian gene expression (20).
Recent reports have highlighted the interplay between circadian oscillators, metabolism, and physiology. Whereas genes involved in the glucose and lipid
metabolism are known to exhibit circadian variations
(21–23), molecular studies have revealed a critical role
for bmal1 and clock genes in regulating glucose homeostasis (24) and lipid metabolism (25–28). Moreover, the cross talk between ROR and Rev-erb was
shown to be physiologically important for the control
of cholesterol and triglyceride metabolism (29–31). In
turn, the peripheral clocks can be coordinately regulated by multiple circulating factors, which are affected
by the metabolic status of the organism. Indeed, glucose, one of the major food metabolites that exhibits a
plasma diurnal rhythm, is a direct resetting signal in
cultured cells by down-regulating per1 and per2 RNA
levels (32). The levels of glucose-regulated hormones
such as insulin or glucagon immediately up-regulate
per1 and per2 expression (13). In addition, other studies have revealed an important role of glucocorticoids
and retinoids in the resetting of peripheral clocks (33,
34). Although the elucidation of the mechanisms that
govern the connection between metabolism and circadian clock has just begun, it appears that several
members of the nuclear receptor family are involved in
this pathway.
Evidence has emerged that peroxisome proliferatoractivated receptor  (PPAR), a member of the nuclear
receptor superfamily that regulates the expression of
numerous genes involved in lipid metabolism and energy homeostasis, can play a role in the normal circadian regulation. First, PPAR has been identified as a
circadian clock-controlled gene with a diurnal rhythm
at the mRNA and protein levels in rats and mice in
many peripheral organs such as liver, heart, kidney,
and to a lesser extent in the SCN, where the central
pacemaker is located (7, 35, 36). This circadian expression of PPAR may be in part controlled by hormonal factors, because insulin and glucocorticoids
regulate its mRNA expression (35, 37–39). A recent
study has also shown that the circadian expression of
PPAR mRNA is regulated by the peripheral oscillators in a CLOCK-dependent manner (27). Second, because daily variations in lipogenic and cholesterogenic
gene expression are attenuated or abolished in mice in
which the PPAR gene has been disrupted, PPAR
may be an important mediator for the circadian regulation of lipid metabolism (40, 41). It is now believed
that PPAR has a wider general role in transducing
hormone messages involved in dietary status (42).
These observations thus suggest that PPAR may be
required in the control of circadian food-dependent
fluctuations in gene expression. Third, PPAR is connected to the regulation of other nuclear hormone
receptors such as Rev-erb, because fenofibrate, a
PPAR agonist, induces human and rat rev-erb expression in liver through the direct binding of PPAR
on an atypical DR2 element located in the rev-erb
promoter (30, 43). It was recently shown that CLOCK
plays an important role in lipid homeostasis by regulating the circadian transactivation of potential PPAR
response element (PPRE)-controlled target genes (26)
and of PPAR gene itself via an E-box rich region in
vivo and in vitro (27). Fourth, the partner of PPAR,
RXR, interacts with CLOCK protein in a ligand-dependent manner and inhibits CLOCK/brain and muscle Arnt-like protein 1 (BMAL1)-dependent activation
via an E-box element (34). Other results have also
suggested that PPAR deficiency disturbs the normal
circadian regulation of certain SREBP-sensitive genes
in the liver (40, 44).
Despite much evidence supporting a role of PPAR
in metabolic control and energy homeostasis (45) and
the accumulation of data connecting metabolism and
circadian biology (3, 46, 47), little is known concerning
the influence of PPAR on the circadian clock. In the
present study, we investigated the mechanisms by
which PPAR can influence the pacemakers acting in
the SCN and in the liver. We report that PPAR-deficient (PPAR/) mice present similar locomotor activity with wild-type (WT) mice without any molecular
alteration of clock gene expression in the SCN. Interestingly, we show for the first time that PPAR is a
direct regulator of bmal1 expression in liver via its
direct binding on a PPRE located on the bmal1 promoter. This regulation is required to maintain the normal circadian oscillation of bmal1 in vivo. Stressing the
importance of the regulatory pathway that exists between PPAR and the peripheral clock genes, we
show that fenofibrate up-regulates bmal1 gene expression in murine liver and induces circadian rhythm
of clock gene expression in cell culture in a PPARdependent manner. Reversely, we also observe that
BMAL1 is an upstream regulator of the PPAR gene
expression. Taken together, our data implicate PPAR
in a new regulatory loop that controls peripheral circadian clocks.
RESULTS
PPAR/ Mice Display Normal Circadian
Locomotor Activity and Clock Gene Expression in
the SCN
To evaluate the influence of PPAR on the function of
the central circadian oscillator, behavioral analysis of
the circadian rhythm was carried out using PPAR/
and WT littermate mice. Animals were first synchronized for 2 wk to a 12-h light, 12-h dark cycle (12L:
12D). Under these light conditions, WT and PPAR/
mice entrained normally and consolidated their loco1716
Mol Endocrinol, August 2006, 20(8):1715–1727
Canaple et al. • PPAR and Liver Circadian Clock
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 09 June 2015. at 04:57 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
motor activity to the dark period of the LD cycle (Fig.
1A). No difference in the total amount of daily activity
was observed between WT and PPAR/ mice (Fig.
1B). When placed in constant darkness, the PPARdeficient mice do not display an arrhythmic behavior
with endogenous period similar between both genotypes (24.11  0.11 and 24.12  0.08 h, respectively,
in PPAR-deficient and WT mice).
To determine whether the inactivation of PPAR can
alter the master oscillator in the SCN at the molecular
level, we further compared the circadian expression
profiles of clock genes in the SCN of WT and PPAR
mutant mice (Fig. 1C). There is no significant difference in the amplitude and in the phase of the circadian
expression of the tested clock genes (bmal1, per2,
per3, cry2, and rev-erb). This clearly suggests that
Fig. 1. Entrainment and Free Running Locomotor Activity of WT and PPAR/ Mice
A, Representative actograms of locomotor activity for WT and PPAR/ mice under 12L:12D cycle and DD conditions. After
2 wk of entrainment under a 12L:12D cycle, mice were placed in DD. Horizontal bar at the top of each actogram depicts the
lighting conditions of LD cycles. Time spans in darkness are marked by gray shadowing. B, Twenty-four-hour profiles of
spontaneous locomotor activity of WT () and PPAR-deficient mice (u). The distribution of activity was determined every 12 h
during LD cycle. Shadowed areas indicate the dark period. Results are expressed as the means  SEM of values from eight animals
per group. C, Circadian expression of bmal1, per2, per3, cry2, and rev-erb mRNAs in SCN of WT () and PPAR/ mice (f).
Real-time PCR was used to determine transcript levels at four circadian times (CT1, CT8, CT13, CT21). Transcript levels are
displayed as relative quantity (RQ) after normalization to the noncyclic 36B4 expression levels in the same sample. Results are
expressed as the means  SEM of values of two independent experiments, each realized with three animals for both genotypes
at each time point. Statistically significant differences between WT and PPAR-deficient mice are indicated by an asterisk (P 
0.05).
Canaple et al. • PPAR and Liver Circadian Clock
Mol Endocrinol, August 2006, 20(8):1715–1727
1717
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 09 June 2015. at 04:57 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
there is no major molecular effect of the PPAR deletion at the central clock level and that the expression
of PPAR in the SCN is not essential for the basal
maintenance of the central circadian timing system.
PPAR Is Required to Maintain the Amplitude of
the Circadian Expression of bmal1 in the
Murine Liver
To evaluate the role of PPAR on the circadian system
of the liver (a peripheral clock), where it is mainly
expressed, we analyzed the circadian expression of
several clock genes in liver isolated from WT and
PPAR mutant mice. As already reported, PPAR expression effectively follows a circadian rhythm in peripheral tissues such as liver, kidney, and muscle (data
not shown). Figure 2 shows that all the clock genes
tested (bmal1, per1, per2, per3, cry2, and rev-erb) are
expressed in a circadian manner with no modification
in the phase of their rhythm between both genotypes.
By contrast, the amplitudes of bmal1 and per3 expression are drastically affected in PPAR-deficient mice
by comparison with the WT, with a significant decrease at circadian time 1 (CT1) and CT21 for bmal1
(where CT0 is subjective day beginning at 0700 h, and
CT12 is subjective night beginning at 1900 h) and an
increase at CT8 for per3. These data suggest that
PPAR does not influence the phase synchronization
properties of the liver clock but affects the amplitude
of two major clock genes bmal1 and per3.
Food-Induced Phase Resetting Entrains
Circadian PPAR Expression and Is Globally
Maintained in Liver of PPAR/ Mice
Although the day-night cycle is the most obvious time
cue, animals can also respond to other synchronizing
signals, and feeding time appears to be a potent temporal cue, or Zeitgeber, for the liver clock (10, 11).
According to PPAR role in the hepatic lipid metabolism during starvation, we hypothesized its potential
role in food phase resetting of the liver clock. To examine whether the daily feeding time can affect the
phase of the PPAR circadian expression in the liver,
WT mice were fed for 2 wk exclusively during the day
or during the night. As expected, mice fed exclusively
during the day displayed an inversed phase in circadian hepatic expression of bmal1, per1, per3, and
rev-erb gene by comparison to mice fed only during
the night. Similarly, feeding during the day entirely
inversed the phase of liver PPAR expression (Fig.
3A), a result that is in agreement with the demonstration that PPAR is a clock-controlled gene in the liver
(7, 36). Control mice fed only during the night displayed a similar phase of hepatic clock gene expression and PPAR than mice fed ad libitum.
Fig. 2. Circadian Expression of bmal1, per1, per2, per3, cry2, and rev-erb mRNAs in Liver of WT () and PPAR/ Mice (f)
using Real-Time PCR
Transcript level values are expressed as relative quantity (RQ) after normalization to the corresponding noncyclic 36B4
expression levels. Results are shown as the mean  SEM of values of two independent experiments, each with three animals for
both genotypes at each time point. There were significant variations between the two genotypes at CT1 and CT21 for bmal1 and
CT8 for per3 as indicated by an asterisk (P  0.01).
1718
Mol Endocrinol, August 2006, 20(8):1715–1727
Canaple et al. • PPAR and Liver Circadian Clock
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 09 June 2015. at 04:57 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
Next, we studied whether feeding time can also
reset the phase of bmal1, per1, per3, and rev-erb
expression in the absence of PPAR (Fig. 3B). Except
the bmal1 expression, which was refractory to resetting, per1, per3, and rev-erb genes showed an inversed rhythm of their expression in the liver after
daytime-restricted feeding compared with nighttime
feeding in the PPAR knockout context. The present
Fig. 3. Circadian Gene Expression in Liver after Restricted Feeding in WT and PPAR/ Mice
A, PPAR expression in the liver of food-entrained WT mice (daytime (--) or nighttime feeding (f). B, Circadian accumulation
of bmal1, per1, per3, and rev-erb mRNAs in liver of WT and PPAR/ mice as a function of daytime () or nighttime feeding
(f). Transcript levels are displayed as relative quantity (RQ) after normalization to the corresponding noncyclic 36B4 expression
levels. The presented values are expressed as means  SEM of duplicates of the same reaction for six different mice per genotype.
Canaple et al. • PPAR and Liver Circadian Clock
Mol Endocrinol, August 2006, 20(8):1715–1727
1719
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 09 June 2015. at 04:57 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
results show that feeding time can reset the expression of per1, per3, and rev-erb in the liver of
PPAR/ mice and suggest that bmal1 expression
might be controlled by PPAR.
Fenofibrate Induces Expression of Clock Genes
in Rat-1 Fibroblasts and Up-Regulates bmal1
Gene Expression in Liver
Because PPAR presents a circadian expression in
liver, we first studied whether a shock with a serumrich medium is able to induce an oscillation of PPAR
in the well-established in vitro model Rat-1 fibroblasts
(9, 13, 48–50). As shown in Fig. 4A, PPAR gene
expression is induced by a serum shock in Rat-1 fibroblasts with a maximal level reached 12 h after the
beginning of the treatment in comparison with the
control. The induced-oscillating expressions of reverb and cry1 after serum shock were in accordance
with previously reported data (9, 51). In addition, reverb expression is delayed (peak at 16 h after the
serum shock treatment) compared with PPAR expression, which suggests that in Rat-1 fibroblasts
PPAR induces rev-erb expression. Similarly to
these observations, it seems likely that serum largely
participates in the synchronization of the circadian
oscillation of PPAR mRNA in fibroblast cultures.
Fibrates are well-known activators of PPAR expression and are classical drugs used in the treatment
of dyslipidemias. Using the same in vitro model, we
then evaluated whether fenofibrate can induce expression of PPAR gene. The addition of fenofibrate into
the serum-free medium triggered a rhythmic expression of PPAR peaking 12–14 h as observed after a
serum treatment (Fig. 4B). Fenofibrate induced a
PPAR expression 6-fold higher than serum (Fig. 4, A
and B).
Fenofibrate can also induce a rhythmic expression
of clock genes. The temporal induction by fenofibrate
of cry1, rev-erb, and bmal1 expression into the culture medium was almost similar to that observed after
a serum-shock: cry1 mRNA level peaked at Zeitgeber
time 8 (ZT8) to ZT10 (where ZT0 is time when the light
switched on at 0700 h, and ZT12 is time when the light
switched off at 1900 h), rev-erb at ZT16–ZT20, and
bmal1 at ZT4 (Fig. 4C). Thus, fenofibrate can act as a
Zeitgeber in cell culture and trigger a rhythm of clock
gene expression.
To determine whether fenofibrate can also reset the
liver clock in vivo, the response of bmal1 and rev-erb
genes to fenofibrate treatment was compared in liver
of WT and PPAR/ mice (Fig. 4D). In accordance
with our previous results, fenofibrate was also able to
markedly induce bmal1 mRNA levels in control mice
but not in PPAR-deficient mice, suggesting that
bmal1 induction by fenofibrate is effectively mediated
by PPAR. Similarly, as it was previously reported in
rat liver and human hepatocytes (30, 43), administration of fenofibrate in WT mice significantly increased
the rev-erb mRNA levels. As expected, rev-erb expression in PPAR knockout mice was not induced by
fenofibrate, confirming that murine rev-erb induction
by fenofibrate is mediated by PPAR. Taken together,
these data strongly suggest that fenofibrate can alter
the endogenous rhythm of the liver peripheral clock
and in vivo.
PPAR Is a Direct Regulator of bmal1 Expression
To specify the regulation of bmal1 gene expression by
PPAR suggested by our analysis of bmal1 expression
in the PPAR/ mice, we analyzed the interaction of
PPAR with the bmal1 promoter. First, we performed
a bioinformatic research of potential PPAR binding
sites (PPREs) on the bmal1 promoter region using the
Nubiscan software. Two major PPREs were predicted
at the positions 1519 (, TGGACATGGGTCA) and
4943 (, AGGGCTGAGGACA), the start site corresponding to the one identified in mouse testis (52). To
evaluate whether PPAR binds to the bmal1 gene
promoter in vivo, the occupancy of the potential PPRE
binding sites by PPAR was analyzed using chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays performed on hepatocyte DNA using an anti-PPAR antibody (Fig. 5A).
As previously shown in vitro, the DNA encompassing
the rev-erb Rev-DR2 site (position 45) was precipitated in vivo by the anti-PPAR antibody after fibrate
treatment (Fig. 5A, lower panel, lanes 7 and 9), in
accordance
with
a
PPAR-Rev-erb
cross
talk
through competition for binding to the same Rev-DR2
site (43). Moreover, an amplification product was observed when the same DNA samples were PCR-amplified using primers covering the PPRE located at the
position 1519 in the bmal1 promoter (Fig. 5A, upper
panel, lanes 7 and 9). No amplification product was
obtained using primers flanking the site at the position
4943 (middle panel). These data further demonstrate
that in mice in vivo, PPAR directly binds to the PPRE
site located at the position 1519 of the bmal1 promoter in peripheral oscillators and therefore that
bmal1 is a direct PPAR target gene.
PPAR mRNA Expression Is Severely DownRegulated in the Liver of bmal1/ Mice
To test the hypothesis that the regulation of circadian
PPAR expression involves bmal1 in the liver, we analyzed the daily accumulation of PPAR mRNA in the
liver of bmal1/ mice by quantitative PCR. PPAR
mRNA expression is rhythmic in bmal1/ mice with a
maximum around ZT12 as observed in WT mice,
whereas the amplitude of the peak of expression is
significantly dampened (Fig. 5B). This result suggests
that BMAL1 is an upstream regulator of PPAR gene
and is consistent with the recent observation that
PPAR expression is also CLOCK dependent (27).
1720
Mol Endocrinol, August 2006, 20(8):1715–1727
Canaple et al. • PPAR and Liver Circadian Clock
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 09 June 2015. at 04:57 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
Fig. 4. Effect of Serum Shock or Fenofibrate on Clock Gene Expression
A, Accumulation of PPAR (), cry1 (Œ), and rev-erb (f) mRNAs in Rat-1 fibroblasts shocked with 50% of horse serum.
PPAR accumulation in absence of horse serum (f) is reported as a control of noninduction. The presented values are means 
SEM of duplicates of the same reaction for three different experimental points. B, Accumulation of PPAR mRNAs in Rat-1
fibroblasts shocked with 50 M fenofibrate (f) or with vehicle () as controls. The presented values are means  SEM of duplicates
of the same reaction for three independent experimental points. C, Accumulation of bma1l, cry1, and rev-erb mRNAs in Rat-1
fibroblasts shocked with fenofibrate (f) or with vehicle () as controls. The presented values are means  SEM of duplicates of
three independent experimental points. D, Circadian accumulation of bmal1 and rev-erb mRNAs in liver of WT and PPARa/
mice treated (f) or not () with fenofibrate. In this experiment, mice were treated for 2 wk with fenofibric acid (vehicle DMSO)
mixed in the drinking water at the final concentration of 7 mM. Control animals were treated with the vehicle in the drinking water.
Real-time PCR was used to determine transcript levels. Transcript level values are displayed as relative quantity (RQ) after
normalization to the noncyclic 36B4 expression levels in the same sample. Results are expressed as the means  SEM of values
from eight animals for both genotypes at each time point.
Canaple et al. • PPAR and Liver Circadian Clock
Mol Endocrinol, August 2006, 20(8):1715–1727
1721
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 09 June 2015. at 04:57 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
DISCUSSION
A New Regulatory Feedback Loop Involved
BMAL1 and PPAR in Peripheral Clocks
Molecular dissection of the mechanisms by which the
clock oscillating system is controlled remains one of
the most important challenges to assess the importance of the circadian regulation in diverse physiological and metabolic processes in mammals. In the
present study, we have integrated the PPAR gene
and its protein into a new positive-regulatory feedback
loop in the liver. A model summarizing our main results
is shown in Fig. 6. We show that PPAR plays an
important role in the endogenous rhythmic property of
peripheral clocks in vivo, whereas in the central clock
PPAR deficiency does not alter the circadian expression of clock genes. These clock gene expressions are
only affected in the liver of PPAR-deficient mice.
First, PPAR is not essential to drive the central circadian system because PPAR/ mice entrained
normally without arrhythmic behavior in constant darkness and displayed no alteration in the amplitude and
the phase of circadian expression of the clock genes
(bmal1, per2, per3, cry2, and rev-erb) compared with
WT mice. The lack of PPAR-dependent clock regulation in vivo in the SCN can be due either to the
absence of a circadian PPAR function in the central
clock or to the presence of another isotype of PPAR (,
) or other nuclear receptors that are able to bind to
the PPRE site and to exert a compensatory effect.
Second, the expression of bmal1, an essential gene of
the molecular oscillator, is drastically reduced in the
liver of PPAR-deficient mice. This regulation of bmal1
transcription by PPAR is likely through a direct binding of PPAR to the PPRE element located at the
position 1519 in the bmal1 promoter. In addition to
the established transactivation of the circadian promoter rev-erb by PPAR (43), our data largely support the view that PPAR also associates with the
Fig. 5. Reciprocal Regulation of BMAL1 and PPAR
A, ChIP of the potential bmal1 and rev-erb PPRE elements with PPAR antibodies. WT and PPAR/ mice (n  3 for both
genotypes) were fed for 5 d with either Wy14,643 or vehicle (V). ChIP of liver extracts was performed with a PPAR antibody
(PPAR-Ab) and analyzed by PCR for enrichment of the PPRE element of the bmal1 promoter (top panels) and of the rev-erb
promoter Rev -DR2 (bottom panel). p.i., Preimmune serum; Input, nonprecipitated genomic DNA. B, Daily expression of PPAR
mRNAs in WT () and bmal1 mutant mice (f) using real-time PCR. Transcript levels were normalized against the noncyclic 36B4
transcript level in the same sample. Results are expressed as the means  SEM of values from three to five animals at each time
point. Statistically significant differences between WT and deficient mice are indicated by an asterisk (P 0.0001).
1722
Mol Endocrinol, August 2006, 20(8):1715–1727
Canaple et al. • PPAR and Liver Circadian Clock
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 09 June 2015. at 04:57 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
circadian bmal1 promoter in vivo. Interestingly, PPAR
expression is strongly decreased in the liver of bmal1deficient mice compared with WT mice. Because no
significant change in hepatic CLOCK level is found in
bmal1-deficient mice compared with WT mice (53),
this suggests that BMAL1 itself is in return involved in
the circadian transactivation of PPAR gene at the
level of peripheral oscillators in mice. Other observations have also revealed that CLOCK is involved in the
circadian transactivation of PPAR (27) and interacts
with its partner RXR (34). We propose that bmal1 is
directly and positively regulated by PPAR and that
BMAL1 imposes in return a circadian regulation on
PPAR transcription.
PPAR Expression Is Resetted by Feeding in
Peripheral Clocks
Liver is known to be the organ reacting most rapidly to
the temporal feeding regimen because it plays a dominant role in the metabolism and processing of food
components, such as proteins, lipids, and carbohydrates. It was clearly established that the circadian
gene expression in peripheral hepatic cells is intimately connected to feeding (10, 11) and that PPAR
is involved in food processing and energy homeostasis (45). A connection between circadian gene regulation, metabolism and energy homeostasis was also
established. For example, glucose metabolism (e.g.
6-phosphofructokinase-2,
aldolase,
and
glucose
phosphate isomerase) is under the control of the circadian time-keeping system (23, 24). Rhythmic expression of numerous enzymes and transcription factors involved in protein and amino acid metabolism
(e.g. serine dehydratase, DBP, and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase) (7, 54), in fat metabolism (e.g. cholesterol 7-hydroxylase, PPAR, HMGCoA
lyase
and
reductase)
(7,
35,
55),
or
in
detoxification process [e.g. steroid 15-hydroxylase
(Cyp2a4)
and
coumarin
7-hydroxylase
(Cyp2a5),
Cyp2e1, Cyp17, and glutathione-S-transferase 2]
(23, 56) was also observed in liver. Herein, we show
that the circadian expression of PPAR is resetted by
feeding time and that, in the absence of PPAR, clock
Fig. 6. Model of Cross Talk between PPAR and Circadian Pathways Depicting the Control of Circadian Regulation by PPAR
in Peripheral Clocks
In mammals, circadian rhythms are generated by the main pacemaker located in the SCN of the hypothalamus, which
synchronizes the peripheral oscillators and ensure an ordered response of the organism in terms of physiology, metabolism, and
behavior to environmental changes. These peripheral clocks can be resetted by alternative routes such as feeding time. Herein,
we show that PPAR is entirely resetted by feeding time. We propose that bmal1 transcription is directly positively regulated by
PPAR and that BMAL1 imposes circadian regulation on PPAR transcription (bold arrows). The amplified accumulation of
PPAR under fibrate treatment leads in turn to a higher level of expression of bmal1 gene (dashed arrows).
Canaple et al. • PPAR and Liver Circadian Clock
Mol Endocrinol, August 2006, 20(8):1715–1727
1723
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 09 June 2015. at 04:57 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
gene expression in liver is entrained by reversed feeding time, suggesting that PPAR does not play a major
role in food resetting. We underline that, after an extended duration of daytime feeding, the food-imposed
reversed phase of circadian gene expression in peripheral liver is similar between WT and PPAR-deficient mice. This is probably due to PPAR-independent signaling pathway that plays a major role in the
phase resetting of circadian gene expression by feeding time.
Fibrates as a Resetting Signal in Cell Cultures
and Peripheral Clocks
Previous studies have shown that PPAR expression
is positively controlled by glucocorticoids and fibrates
and negatively by insulin (37–39). Fibrates are also
known to up-regulate the expression of rev-erb in the
rat liver and in both rat and human primary hepatocyte
cultures (30, 43). In vitro, PPAR mRNA was induced
in rat fibroblasts culture after both a serum shock and,
more interestingly, a fenofibrate treatment. Moreover,
fenofibrate efficiently stimulates the rhythmic expression of several clock genes such as cry1, bmal1, and
rev-erb. This suggests that fenofibrate is able to entrain rhythmic PPAR and clock gene expressions in
Rat-1 fibroblasts. In vivo, rev-erb mRNA level is upregulated by fenofibrate in the mouse liver of WT animals. Because this up-regulation of rev-erb gene by
fibrates is not observed in the PPAR-deficient mice,
we confirm in vivo that the induction of rev-erb gene
expression by fibrates is mediated by PPAR at the
transcriptional level. Interestingly, the increased accumulation of PPAR after fibrate treatment leads in turn
to a higher level of expression of bmal1 in WT mice.
Other convincing evidence that the fibrate effect on
the bmal1 expression is exerted at the transcriptional
level via the PPAR protein is that fibrates have no
effect on the bmal1 expression in the PPAR/ mice.
Taken together, these results suggest that PPAR
could play a role in integrating chemical signals inside
the liver.
How Circadian Rhythm Might Influence a
Fibrate Therapy?
To date, fibrates are clinically used as hypolipidemic
drugs that lower plasma cholesterol and triglycerides.
They exert their effect by regulating the expression of
several key genes implicated in lipid metabolism via
PPAR activation. Interestingly, fibrate therapy represents a cost-effective approach in the clinical management and the prevention of cardiovascular diseases in a growing population suffering from lifestyleinduced metabolic dysfunctions such as obesity,
insulin resistance, and diabetes (57). Although important differences in lipid metabolism exist between
mice and human, including the function of PPAR (58,
59), our in vitro and in vivo studies suggest that the
regulation by fibrates of the circadian expression of
clock genes may influence the success of a treatment
because it would suggest a potential induction and
subsequently a dysfunction of their expression after
fibrate supply in patients. The validity of this hypothesis remains to be demonstrated in humans. Therefore, one additional question to address is how fibrate
administration at a selected time of the day can impact
the efficacy and the success of the treatment. It will be
of interest to decipher the molecular mechanisms involved in the circadian expression of clock genes and
PPAR-regulated genes in presence or absence of
fibrates to provide new insight in the downstream circadian physiological and cellular processes governed
by PPAR itself. Similarly, such understanding should
lead to new strategies for pharmacological manipulation of the human clock to improve the treatment of
dyslipidaemias.
In summary, our data indicate that PPAR is a specific element of the liver oscillatory clock in mammals
and plays an important role in integrating signals into
the clock machinery. We clearly demonstrate that, in
vivo, PPAR is required to maintain normal circadian
oscillation of the master clock gene bmal1 in liver. This
regulation occurs via a direct binding of PPAR on a
PPRE located in the bmal1 promoter. In addition,
BMAL1 is an upstream regulator of the PPAR expression. This finding provides a new regulatory pathway
for the circadian system and suggests that some transcription factors may have a specific role in the peripheral clocks. Further studies are now required to
determine the exact impact of circadian rhythms on
the metabolic processes governed by PPAR in peripheral organs. This can be addressed by investigating the circadian regulation of PPAR target genes
and some of the downstream targets in the peripheral
clock in WT, PPAR/, and other clock mutant mice.
The complete elucidation of the signaling elements
involved in the interactions between central and peripheral clocks and the mechanisms that govern the
interplay between metabolism and circadian oscillators will also have a major impact on the circadian field
in the next future.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell Culture, Serum, and Fibrate Shock
Rat-1 fibroblasts were grown in DMEM supplemented with
5% fetal calf serum and a mixture of penicillin/streptomycin/
glutamine (PSG). The serum shock was done as described
elsewhere using 50% horse serum (9). For the fibrate shock,
the medium was exchanged with DMEM-PSG supplemented
with 50 M fenofibrate (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) after the cells
reach confluence (time 0). This medium was replaced with
fenofibrate-free DMEM-PSG medium after 2 h. At 0, 4, 8, 12,
16, 20, 24 h after shock, cells were lysed and kept at 70 C
until RNA extraction. Whole-cell RNAs were extracted using
GenElute Mammalian Total RNA Extraction kit from Sigma.
1724
Mol Endocrinol, August 2006, 20(8):1715–1727
Canaple et al. • PPAR and Liver Circadian Clock
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 09 June 2015. at 04:57 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
Animal Experiments
Purebred WT and homozygous PPAR/ mice on an SV129
background were used. All experiments were done with male
mice between 6 and 8 wk of age. Animals were kept under a
12L:12D cycle, and food and drinking water were available ad
libitum, except when indicated otherwise. The experimental
protocols of the current research were approved by the rules
and regulations of French veterinary services.
Locomotor Activity Recording
Adult male mice (n  8 for both WT and PPAR/) were
exposed to 12L:12D cycle for at least 2 wk. For monitoring
locomotor activity, mice were housed individually in cages
equipped with infrared motion captors placed over the cages
and a computerized data acquisition system (Circadian Activity Monitoring System, Institut National de la Sante´ et de la
Recherche Me´ dicale, France). Activity records were analyzed
with the Clocklab software package (Actimetrics, Evanston,
IL). For each animal, the total duration of activity was determined every 2 or 12 h during the LD cycle and then averaged
for WT and knockout mice. Animals were then allowed to free
run in constant darkness (DD) for at least 15 d. The endogenous period in DD was subsequently determined using the
Clocklab software.
Circadian Expression of Clock Genes in Wild-Type vs.
PPAR/ Mice
Twelve WT and 12 PPAR/ mice were maintained for a
period of 2 wk in a 12L:12D cycle and transferred in DD the
day before the kill. Livers and SCN were removed at CT1,
CT8, CT14, and CT21; stored at 70 C until RNA extraction;
and analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR. The experiment was
done twice.
Restricted Feeding
Mice (n  24 both for WT and PPAR/) fed during the day
received food when light was on (0700 to 1900 h), whereas
mice (n  24 both for WT and PPAR/) fed during the night
received food from 1900 to 0700 h for 2 wk. Water was freely
available over the experimental period. As controls, WT and
PPAR/ mice (n  24 for both) were fed ad libitum. Mice
were transferred in DD the day before killing. Livers were
dissected at indicated circadian times (CT1, CT8, CT14,
CT21), stored at 70 C until RNA extraction, and analyzed by
quantitative-RT-PCR.
Fenofibrate Response
In this experiment, mice (n  32 both for WT and PPAR/)
were treated for 2 wk with fenofibric acid (vehicle DMSO)
mixed in the drinking water at the final concentration of 7 mM.
Control animals (n  32 both for WT and PPAR/) were
treated with vehicle in the drinking water. Livers were removed at CT1, CT8, CT14, and CT21, stored at 70 C until
RNA extraction, and analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR.
Analysis of bmal1/ Mice
WT and homozygous bmal1/ mice on B6 background
(both females and males aged from 8–14 wk provided by C.
Bradfield, McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI) were kept under 12L:12D
cycles and fed ad libitum. Livers were removed at indicated
Zeitgeber time. Reverse-transcribed total RNAs from three to
five animals per time point were analyzed by quantitative
RT-PCR as described below.
RNA Extraction and Quantitative RT-PCR
Total RNAs were prepared from cells or from organs according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Sigma) and reverse
transcribed using random primers and MMLV Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA). cDNA were then used
as template for a quantitative real-time PCR assay using the
QuantiTect SYBR Green PCR reagents (Qiagen, Valencia,
CA) and the DNA Engine Opticon system (MJ Research,
Cambridge, MA). Each couple of oligonucleotides used were
designed to hybridize on different exons. The sequences of
forward and reverse primers were as follows: bmal1, forward,
5-CCAAGAAAGTATGGACACAGACAAA-3; bmal1, reverse,
5-GCATTCTTGATCCTTCCTTGGT-3; cry1, forward, 5-CTGGCGTGGAAGTCATCGT-3; cry1, reverse, 5-CTGTCCGCCATTGAGTTCTATG-3; cry2, forward, 5-TGTCCCTTCCTGTGTGGAAGA-3; cry2, reverse, 5-GCTCCCAGCTTGGCTTGAA-3; per1, forward, 5-GGAGACCACTGAGAGCAGCAAG-3; per1, reverse, 5-CGCACTCAGGAGGCTGTAGGC-3;
per2, forward, 5-ATGCTCGCCATCCACAAGA-3; per2, reverse, 5-GCGGAATCGAATGGGAGAAT-3; per3, forward,
5-GGCGTTCTACGCGCACACTGC-3;
per3,
reverse,
5CGCTGGTGCACATTCATACTGCG-3; ppar, forward, 5CGCTATGAAGTTCAATGCCTT-3; ppar, reverse, 5-TGCAACTTCTCAATGTAGCC-3; rev-erb, forward, 5-CATGGTGCTACTGTGTAAGGTGTGT-3; rev-erb, reverse, 5-CACAGGCGTGCACTCCATAG-3; 36B4, forward, 5-ACCTCCTTCTTCCAGGCTTT-3; and 36B4, reverse, 5-CCCACCTTGTCTCCAGTCTTT-3.
The efficiency (95%) and the specificity of the amplification were controlled by generating standard curves and carrying out melting curves and agarose gels of the amplicons,
respectively. The relative levels of each RNA were calculated
by 2CT (CT standing as the cycle number in which SYBR
Green fluorescence exceeds a constant threshold value) and
normalized to the corresponding noncyclic 36B4 RNA levels.
The presented values are means  SEM of duplicates of the
same reaction for at least three different mice or three experimental points.
The significance of differences was assessed by distribution-free two-way ANOVA. Paired Student’s tests were used
to compare WT and PPAR/ or bmal1/ mice. Results are
presented as mean  SEM. Differences were considered significant when P  0.05.
ChIP Assays
ChIP experiments were performed as already described in
Ijpenberg et al. (60). Briefly, WT and PPAR/ mice (n  3)
were fed for 5 d with either Wy14,643 (50 mg/kgd) or vehicle.
Immunoprecipitation of liver extracts was done using a
PPAR antibody and the immunoprecipitated DNA was PCR
amplified using primers flanking either the rev-erb Rev-DR2
(GTGTCACTGGGGC) or potential PPRE (usually AGGTCANAGGTCA) on the bmal1 promoter predicted using the
computer program NUBISCAN available at the following
website: www.nubiscan.unibas.ch (61). An equal volume of
nonprecipitated genomic DNA (Input) was amplified as positive control. One fifth of PCR products were separated on an
ethidium bromide-stained 2% agarose gel.
Acknowledgments
We thank J. Samarut and M. Janier for their financial support, and B. Desvergne and G. Triqueneaux for their helpful
discussions. We are also grateful to F. J. Gonzalez for the
PPAR/ mice.
Received January 30, 2006. Accepted March 15, 2006.
Address all correspondence and requests for reprints to:
Vincent Laudet, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
Canaple et al. • PPAR and Liver Circadian Clock
Mol Endocrinol, August 2006, 20(8):1715–1727
1725
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 09 June 2015. at 04:57 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
Unite´ Mixte de Recherche 5161, Institut Fe´ de´ ratif de Recherche 128 BioSciences Lyon-Gerland, Laboratoire de Biologie
Mole´ culaire de la Cellule, Ecole Normale Supe´ rieure, 46 alle´ e
d’Italie, 69364 Lyon cedex 07, France. E-mail: vincent.
laudet@ens-lyon.fr.
This work was supported by Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique; L’E´ cole Normale Supe´ rieure de Lyon; Re´ gion Rhoˆ ne-Alpes; Fondation Rhoˆ ne Alpes Futur; Ministe` re
de l’E´ ducation Nationale, de la Recherche et de la Technologie; and FP5-OldClock QLK6-CT-2002-02258.
Present address for L.C.: ANIMAGE, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique Unite´ Mixte de Recherche 5515, 59
Boulevard Pinel, 69677 Bron cedex, France.
L.C., J.R., O.D.-B., B.R., N.S.T., L.M., F.D., W.W., and V.L.
have nothing to declare.
