-Cell Deﬁcit and Increased -Cell Apoptosis in
Humans With Type 2 Diabetes
Alexandra E. Butler,1 Juliette Janson,2 Susan Bonner-Weir,3 Robert Ritzel,1 Robert A. Rizza,4 and
Peter C. Butler1
Type 2 diabetes is characterized by impaired insulin
secretion. Some but not all studies suggest that a
decrease in -cell mass contributes to this. We examined pancreatic tissue from 124 autopsies: 91 obese
cases (BMI >27 kg/m2; 41 with type 2 diabetes, 15 with
impaired fasting glucose [IFG], and 35 nondiabetic subjects) and 33 lean cases (BMI <25 kg/m2; 16 type 2
diabetic and 17 nondiabetic subjects). We measured
relative -cell volume, frequency of -cell apoptosis and
replication, and new islet formation from exocrine
ducts (neogenesis). Relative -cell volume was increased in obese versus lean nondiabetic cases (P 
0.05) through the mechanism of increased neogenesis
(P < 0.05). Obese humans with IFG and type 2 diabetes
had a 40% (P < 0.05) and 63% (P < 0.01) deﬁcit and
lean cases of type 2 diabetes had a 41% deﬁcit (P <
0.05) in relative -cell volume compared with nondiabetic obese and lean cases, respectively. The frequency
of -cell replication was very low in all cases and no
different among groups. Neogenesis, while increased
with obesity, was comparable in obese type 2 diabetic,
IFG, or nondiabetic subjects and in lean type 2 diabetic
or nondiabetic subjects. However, the frequency of
-cell apoptosis was increased 10-fold in lean and 3-fold
in obese cases of type 2 diabetes compared with their
respective nondiabetic control group (P < 0.05). We
conclude that -cell mass is decreased in type 2 diabetes
and that the mechanism underlying this is increased
-cell apoptosis. Since the major defect leading to a
decrease in -cell mass in type 2 diabetes is increased
apoptosis, while new islet formation and -cell replication are normal, therapeutic approaches designed to
arrest apoptosis could be a signiﬁcant new development
in the management of type 2 diabetes, because this
approach might actually reverse the disease to a degree
rather than just palliate glycemia. Diabetes 52:102–110,
2003
T
ype 2 diabetes is characterized by a progressive
decline in -cell function and chronic insulin
resistance (1,2). Obesity is a major risk factor for
the development of type 2 diabetes (3,4) and is
thought to confer increased risk for type 2 diabetes
through the mechanism of associated insulin resistance
(5). However, most people who are obese (and relatively
insulin resistant) do not develop diabetes but compensate
by increasing insulin secretion (6). In rodent models of
obesity without diabetes there is an adaptive increase in
-cell mass (7). Although not much data are available,
prior studies suggest that -cell mass is also adaptively
increased in nondiabetic obese humans (8,9). Regulation
of the -cell mass appears to involve a balance of -cell
replication and apoptosis, as well as development of new
islets from exocrine pancreatic ducts (10,11). Disruption
of any of these pathways of -cell formation or increased
rates of -cell death could cause a decrease in -cell mass.
The islet in type 2 diabetes is characterized by deposits of
amyloid (12) derived from the peptide islet amyloid
polypeptide (IAPP), also known as amylin (13). This
peptide has been shown to cause apoptosis of -cells
(14,15), particularly when it is in the form of small IAPP
oligomers (16). However, it is unknown whether -cell
apoptosis is increased in type 2 diabetes.
Also, there is controversy whether -cell mass is decreased in type 2 diabetes (9,17–24). These discrepancies
are in part due to the paucity of available data in humans.
It is difﬁcult to obtain pancreatic tissue from humans,
since this usually only becomes available at autopsy, when
the pancreas may have undergone extensive autolysis.
Also, reliable clinical information about autopsy cases is
often unavailable. It is therefore not surprising that there
are few studies of islet morphology in humans with
diabetes, and in most of these, only small numbers of
cases were included. Also, clinical data before death is
minimal in many of these studies. Given the small number
of cases, matching the cases for degree of obesity and age
of death has not always been possible. At the Mayo Clinic
some of these difﬁculties are overcome. Autopsies are
performed within 12 h of death (usually 6 h), including
weekends. The Mayo Clinic integrated medical record
system allows easy access to the prior clinical records of
the cases. As the Mayo Clinic tends to be the primary
health care provider for people hospitalized at the medical
center for their ﬁnal illness, most of the autopsy cases
From the 1Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California; the 2Karolinska
Institute, Stockholm, Sweden; the 3Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, Massachusetts; and the 4Division of Endocrinology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. Peter C. Butler,
Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Keck School of Medicine, University
of Southern California, 1333 San Pablo St., BMT-B11, Los Angeles, CA 90033.
E-mail: pbutler@usc.edu.
Received for publication 19 July 2002 and accepted in revised form 9
October 2002.
FPG, fasting plasma glucose; IAPP, islet amyloid polypeptide; IFG, impaired
fasting glucose.
102
DIABETES, VOL. 52, JANUARY 2003
have had a general medical examination (including a
fasting blood glucose) during the year before death.
In the present study, we took advantage of the unique
autopsy material available at the Mayo Clinic to study 124
human pancreata from cases with and without diabetes
and matched for obesity. All cases had a well-preserved
pancreatic specimen and documented general medical
exam, including a fasting blood glucose obtained during
the 12 months before death. With this unique resource, we
sought to address the following questions: 1) In humans
with obesity, is -cell mass increased compared with lean
nondiabetic humans? 2) In humans with type 2 diabetes, is
-cell mass decreased compared with age-, sex-, and
weight-matched nondiabetic humans? 3) Are there measurable changes in the frequency of -cell apoptosis or
replication or new islet (ductal) formation among these
groups in human pancreatic tissue obtained at autopsy
that might provide insight into the mechanism subserving
any deﬁcit in -cell mass in type 2 diabetes?
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS
Design. We obtained human pancreatic tissue at autopsy from nondiabetic
subjects, patients with type 2 diabetes, and patients with impaired fasting
glucose (IFG); pancreatic samples from both obese and lean patients were
obtained in the nondiabetic and diabetic groups. The current study reﬂects the
population in Minnesota during the time these patients died, which was 98%
Caucasian of Northern European origin.
Subjects. Potential cases were ﬁrst identiﬁed by retrospective analysis of the
Mayo Clinic autopsy database. To be included, cases were required to have 1)
had a full autopsy within 12 h of death, 2) had a general medical examination,
including at least one fasting blood glucose documented within the year
before death, and 3) pancreatic tissue stored that was of adequate size and
quality. Cases were excluded if 1) potential secondary causes of type 1 or type
2 diabetes were present, 2) patients had been exposed to chronic glucocorticoid treatment, or 3) pancreatic tissue had undergone autolysis or showed
evidence of pancreatitis. Inclusion in the lean subgroup required a BMI 25
kg/m2, while inclusion in the obese subgroup required a BMI 27 kg/m2. Cases
were further classiﬁed as nondiabetic (fasting plasma glucose [FPG] 110
mg/dl), IFG (FPG 110–125 mg/dl), or diabetic subjects (FPG 126 mg/dl). As
a consequence of this process, we ultimately included 124 cases (Table 1).
Pancreatic tissue processing. At autopsy in all cases, pancreas was
resected from the tail and, with a sample of spleen, ﬁxed in formaldehyde and
embedded in parafﬁn for subsequent analysis. The autopsy process does not
include full dissection and removal of the retroperitoneal pancreas to determine pancreas weight (as is routinely possible in rodent studies with a more
accessible pancreas). Sections were cut from these parafﬁn blocks and stained
by Congo Red for hematoxylin/eosin and by immunohistochemistry for
insulin, as previously described (25). In addition, sections were analyzed for
replication by immunohistochemistry for Ki67 (anti-Human Ki-67 monoclonal
antibody MIB-1, 1/25; Dako, Carpinteria, CA) (26) and for apoptosis using the
TdT-FragEL Kit (cat. no. QIA 33) from Oncogene Research Products (Cambridge, MA).
Analysis of endocrine pancreatic morphology. The hematoxylin/eosin
slides were examined in all cases to exclude cases with pancreatitis, autolysis,
etc., as per case selection above. Slides stained for insulin (J.J. and A.E.B.),
Congo Red, TUNEL, and Ki67 (A.E.B.) were then examined blinded for
subgroup as detailed below. The blind was broken by P.C.B. and R.R., who
performed the statistical analysis. S.B.-W. provided guidance with measurement of new islet formation and all aspects of -cell sterology. R.A.R.
coordinated availability of samples from Mayo Clinic and clinical information
and overall guidance in study analysis.
Relative -cell volume to exocrine pancreas. As the pancreas weight was
not available, it was not possible to calculate the -cell mass. The pancreas
tends to be slightly larger in nondiabetic than in diabetic humans (27).
Therefore, the ratio of the -cell area/exocrine area (by convention called the
relative -cell volume) should provide a conservative estimate of any decline
in -cell mass in patients with diabetes. To measure this ratio, slides from
each case were examined using an Olympus IX70 inverted system microscope
(Olympus America, Melville, NY) connected to a Hewlett Packard computer
with Image-Pro Plus software (Media Cybernetics, Silver Springs, MD). Slides
immunostained for insulin were analyzed using the Image-Pro Plus system.
The slide was scanned using 4 objective magniﬁcation. A representative area
of pancreas section was chosen for analysis and the coordinates entered into
the program. The image analysis quantiﬁed total tissue area within this region,
followed by the insulin-positive area to generate the ratio of insulin staining to
total pancreas area. The sensitivity for the insulin-positive areas was high, so
that all insulin-positive areas were included irrespective of the intensity of
staining.
To ensure that any changes in the relative -cell volume were not due to
changes in the size of individual -cells (for example due to degranulation),
we also measured the density of nuclei per insulin-positive area in the obese
and lean type 2 diabetic and nondiabetic groups. Five islets from each case
stained for insulin were imaged to provide the insulin-positive area (m2) and
digitally photographed at high power (40). The resulting images were
examined by A.E.B. to manually count the number of nuclei present within the
insulin-stained area in order to compute the ratio of nuclei per insulin-positive
area (m2).
Quantiﬁcation of islet size and islet relative -cell volume. To establish
islet size and the islet relative -cell volume, 20 islets larger than four cells
were studied in detail from each case. First, a ﬁeld at objective magniﬁcation
20 was chosen at random, and then the islets in this ﬁeld and those in the
immediately adjacent ﬁelds were examined until 20 islets had been evaluated.
Each of these 20 islets was evaluated to obtain the total islet cross-sectional
area and the area within this islet positive for insulin. For each case, a mean
TABLE 1
Characteristics of patients
Obese
Lean
Type 2 diabetic
subjects
IFG
Nondiabetic
subjects
Type 2 diabetic
subjects
Nondiabetic
subjects
n
41
19
31
16
17
Sex (F/M)
17/24
9/10
15/16
7/9
7/10
Age (years)
63.3  1.8
63.1  2.3
66.9  2.7
80.2  1.9
78.1  2.9
Data are means  SE.
TABLE 2
Obese and lean cases of type 2 diabetes, subdivided according to treatment (insulin, oral, or diet) to show sex, age, and BMI
Obese type 2 diabetic subjects*
Lean type 2 diabetic subjects
Insulin
Oral
Diet
Insulin
Oral
Diet
n
17
16
7
3
6
7
Sex (F/M)
10/7
5/11
1/6
1/2
4/2
2/5
Age (years)
65.9  1.7
61.9  3.7
59.7  4.7
82.0  3.5
78.2  3.4
81.1  3.0
BMI (kg/m2)
38.3  1.5
38.5  2.1
36.5  2.0
23.6  0.5
23.3  0.8
21.2  0.7
Data are means  SE. *In one obese type 2 diabetic subject, the treatment was unknown.
A.E. BUTLER AND ASSOCIATES
DIABETES, VOL. 52, JANUARY 2003
103
cross-sectional islet area, a mean cross-sectional insulin area within the islet,
and a mean percentage area positive for insulin within the islet were therefore
determined to provide the islet relative -cell volume.
Quantiﬁcation of exocrine duct cells positive for insulin for islet
neogenesis estimate. To assess the relative rate of islet neogenesis from
exocrine duct cells, we quantiﬁed the percentage of exocrine duct cells that
were immunoreactive for insulin. A mean (SE) of 281  11 duct cells were
evaluated as positive or negative for insulin from each pancreas. The resulting
data were expressed as the percentage of duct cells positive for insulin in each
pancreas, and the mean was calculated for each group.
Apoptosis and replication. Slides stained by the TUNEL and Ki67 techniques were each evaluated in direct comparison with those immunostained
for insulin in each case. In most cases, samples of spleen were ﬁxed and
parafﬁn embedded with the pancreas, providing positive controls for apoptosis and replication in the splenic follicles. The number of positive cells that
corresponded to an insulin-positive area in the adjacent section were counted
per islet. An average of 75 islets were examined per case, and the mean
number of positive cells per islet calculated for each case. TUNEL staining
was occasionally present in debris that was no longer present in a distinct cell;
these were not counted. Only discernible cells with TUNEL-positive nuclei
were included. As the relative -cell volume differed among groups (see
RESULTS), we also computed the frequency of -cell apoptosis and -cell
replication events divided by the relative -cell volume to provide a comparison of these events relative to -cell volume per case.
Islet amyloid. To quantify islet amyloid, slides from each case were stained
by Congo Red and examined under polarized light for birefringence. Cases
were scored for 1) presence or absence, 2) frequency of islet amyloid (using
a scale from 0 to 3, where 0 indicated that no islets showed apple green
birefringence, 1 indicated that a few islets in the sample were birefringent, 2
indicated that numerous islets in the sample were birefringent, and 3 indicated
that most islets were birefringent), and 3) extent of islet amyloid (again using
a scale from 0 to 3, where 0 indicated that no islets were birefringent, 1
indicated minimal extent and weak intensity of birefringence in affected islets,
2 indicated moderate extent and intensity of birefringence in affected islets,
and 3 indicated marked extent and intensity of birefringence within affected
islets).
Statistics. The speciﬁc hypotheses posed were tested by use of a Student’s t
test. When all ﬁve groups of cases were compared, ANOVA was used. A P
value 0.05 was considered statistically signiﬁcant. Linear correlation was
performed by regression analysis with a best-ﬁt line and 95% CIs shown
graphically.
RESULTS
Cases (Tables 1 and 2 and Fig. 1). BMI and age of death
did not differ among the type 2 diabetic, nondiabetic, or
IFG subgroups within the obese group. Similarly, there
was no difference in age of death or BMI between lean type
2 diabetic and nondiabetic patients. As expected, the
obese cases had a higher BMI than the lean cases. Also,
lean cases died at a greater age than obese cases (P 
0.0001). The treatments used by patients with type 2
diabetes were diet, sulfonylurea pills, or insulin. No other
classes of oral medications for glycemic control were
available at the time these patients were living. In Table 2,
we show the number of cases treated by each of these
medication types before death.
Relative -cell area to exocrine pancreas (Table 3
and Fig. 2). We report that obesity in nondiabetic humans
is characterized by an 50% increase in relative -cell
volume (2.6  0.39 vs. 1.71  0.28%, P  0.05, obese
nondiabetic vs. lean nondiabetic subjects). Since the nondiabetic obese humans died younger than the nondiabetic
lean humans, the comparison in the relative -cell volume
between these groups may have been confounded by this
age difference. Obese humans with IFG (1.56  0.25%) and
type 2 diabetes (0.96 	 0.1%) had a 40% (P  0.05) and 63%
(P  0.01) deﬁcit in relative -cell volume compared with
nondiabetic obese subjects. The decreased -cell volume
in patients with type 2 diabetes was due to a decreased
number of -cells rather than a decreased volume of
individual cells, since the ratio of nuclei per m2 of
insulin-positive area was no different between the nondiabetic and type 2 diabetic groups (obese 6  1  10
3 vs.
6  1  10
3 nuclei/m2, lean 5  1  10
3 vs. 7  1 
10
3 nuclei/m2; P  NS). Compared with obese nondiabetic cases, obese patients with type 2 diabetes had a
decreased relative -cell volume (Fig. 3) irrespective of
whether they were treated by diet alone (0.78  0.13, 70%
decreased; P  0.01) or on oral medications (0.86  0.25,
67% decreased; P  0.05) or insulin (1.3  0.2, 50%
decreased; P  0.05). There was no difference in the mean
FPG values among these three treatment groups during
the last 2 years of life (Fig. 3). Lean subjects with type 2
diabetes had 41% deﬁcit in relative -cell volume (1.0  0.2
vs. 1.7  0.3%, P  0.05) compared with lean nondiabetic
subjects. The lean diabetic subjects showed a decrease in
FIG. 1. The mean BMI in obese (nondiabetic [ND], IFG, and diabetic
subjects [TTDM]) and lean cases (nondiabetic and type 2 diabetic
subjects).
TABLE 3
The ﬁve patient groups (lean nondiabetic, lean type 2 diabetic, obese nondiabetic, obese IFG, and obese type 2 diabetic subjects)
demonstrating -cell and islet characteristics
Lean
Obese
Nondiabetic
subjects
Type 2
diabetic subjects
Nondiabetic
subjects
IFG
Type 2
diabetic subjects
Relative -cell volume/islet (% of islet)
52.0  4.1
38.0  3.9*
45.4  2.7
43.7  3.4
37.0  2.3†
Islet density (islets/mm2)
3.1  0.2
3.0  0.3
3.5  0.3
2.8  0.2‡
2.6  0.2†
Mean islet size (m2)
7,140  795
6,807  526
7,187  571
7,131  695
7,846  648
Apoptosis/islet (cells/islet)
0.07  0.03
0.47  0.19§
0.20  0.7
—
0.31  0.15
Ki67/islet (cells/islet)
0.04  0.02
0.033  0.01
0.06  0.02
—
0.03  0.01
Data are means  SE. *P  0.01 for lean nondiabetic vs. type 2 diabetic subjects; †P  0.05 for obese nondiabetic vs. type 2 diabetic subjects;
‡P  0.05 for obese nondiabetic vs. IFG subjects; §P  0.05 for lean nondiabetic vs. type 2 diabetic subjects.
-CELL DEFICIT IN TYPE 2 DIABETES
104
DIABETES, VOL. 52, JANUARY 2003
relative -cell volume irrespective of whether they were
treated with diet only (1.24  0.34, P  NS), oral medications (0.86  0.2, P  0.05), or insulin (0.82  0.17, P 
0.05 using Welch’s correction) (Fig. 4). These ﬁndings
were consistent with the observations in individual islets
examined from each group. The mean islet size was
similar in all groups studied (Table 3). In contrast, the
relative -cell islet volume was decreased in obese cases
with type 2 diabetes compared with nondiabetic obese
cases (P  0.05) and in lean cases with type 2 diabetes
compared with nondiabetic lean cases (P  0.01).
Quantiﬁcation of exocrine duct cells positive for
insulin (Figs. 5 and Fig. 6). The presence of islets
budding from exocrine ducts were present in all pancreata
irrespective of obesity or diabetic status. To quantify this
process, we quantiﬁed duct cells immunoreactive for
insulin. There was an increased percentage of -cell–
positive duct cells in obese versus lean cases (P  0.05),
but no difference between the obese nondiabetic and type
2 diabetic cases (P  0.60) or lean type 2 diabetic and
nondiabetic cases (P  0.83).
Replication and cell death (Fig. 7 and Table 3). To
further attempt to elucidate the mechanism for the deﬁcit
in -cell mass present in type 2 diabetes, we examined the
frequency of -cell apoptosis and replication. The frequency of replication was very low in all cases examined.
There was no signiﬁcant difference in the frequency of
replication between obese nondiabetic and type 2 diabetic
subjects or lean nondiabetic and type 2 diabetic subjects
(Fig. 7). There was a trend for decreased -cell replication
and new islet formation with aging (Fig. 8). Although there
was a suggestion of an increased frequency of apoptotic
events per islet (Table 3) in obese type 2 diabetic versus
nondiabetic cases, this did not reach signiﬁcance. However there was an increased frequency of apoptotic events
per islet in lean type 2 diabetic versus nondiabetic cases
(P  0.05). Since the relative -cell volume was decreased
in type 2 diabetes, we also examined the frequency of
-cell apoptosis per islet divided by the relative -cell
volume so that a comparison could be made of the
frequency of -cell apoptosis normalized to -cell mass.
When the frequency of apoptotic events was expressed as
the frequency of -cell apoptosis divided by the relative
-cell volume, then the frequency of apoptosis was 3fold increased in obese cases of type 2 diabetes (P  0.05)
and 10-fold increased in lean cases of type 2 diabetes
(P  0.05) versus their respective control groups.
Islet amyloid (Fig. 9). As expected, islet amyloid was
present in the majority of obese cases with type 2 diabetes
when compared with obese nondiabetic cases (81 vs. 10%,
P  0.01). Of interest, islet amyloid was not increased in
obese cases of IFG compared with obese nondiabetic
cases. In the lean cases, islet amyloid was present in 88%
of type 2 diabetic subjects versus 13% of nondiabetic
FIG. 2. The mean FPG concentration (A) and the mean relative -cell
volume (B) in obese (nondiabetic [ND], IFG, and diabetic subjects
[TTDM]) and lean cases (nondiabetic and type 2 diabetic subjects).
FIG. 3. The mean FPG concentration (A) and the relative -cell volume
(B) in the obese group of nondiabetic (ND) subjects or diabetic
patients who were treated with insulin, sulfonylurea pills (Oral), or
diet only.
A.E. BUTLER AND ASSOCIATES
DIABETES, VOL. 52, JANUARY 2003
105
subjects (P  0.01). The frequency with which islets in a
given sample showed positive birefringence, and the extent of birefringence in affected islets was higher in type 2
diabetic cases, both lean and obese, when compared with
their nondiabetic counterparts.
DISCUSSION
We report that the relative -cell volume in humans with
both IFG and type 2 diabetes is decreased.
A limitation of the present studies is use of the relative
-cell volume as a surrogate of -cell mass. This approach
will be in error to the extent that there were differences in
the overall mean pancreatic weight among groups. However, available data suggest that the pancreatic weight is
similar (21,22) or decreased in patients with diabetes
(9,27). If pancreatic weight is decreased in type 2 diabetes,
then use of the insulin-positive area as a percentage of
total exocrine area should introduce, if anything, a conservative error and underestimate any decrease in -cell
mass in type 2 diabetes. Earlier reports that the -cell mass
is decreased in type 2 diabetes may have included cases of
type 1 diabetes (17,18). However, more recent reports in
which clinical information was better characterized conclude that -cell mass is decreased in type 2 diabetes
(9,22,24), whereas others report no decrease in -cell mass
(19,21). Another study presented in the proceedings of a
recent meeting (23) reported a decreased -cell mass in
lean or obese patients with type 2 diabetes who required
insulin. However, in contrast to our ﬁndings, they reported
that obese type 2 diabetic cases treated by diet only or oral
medications did not have a decreased -cell mass. The
reason for the discrepancy with the latter study is not
known, although it is clear that type 2 diabetes is a
heterogeneous disease with a polygenic basis and that
there may well be differences in the islet in this disease
depending on the region from which the population was
sampled. A question that arises from the present study is:
what is the signiﬁcance of an 60% decrease in -cell mass
in humans? Although rodents tolerate a partial pancreatectomy in which up to 80% of the -cell mass is removed
(28), primates (29) and pigs (30) develop diabetes with a
decrease of -cell mass of 50% or greater. Furthermore,
humans who have had 50% of their pancreas removed
have abnormal glucose tolerance (some developing diabetes by more recent classiﬁcation) and diminished insulin
secretion in response to a hyperglycemic clamp (31–33).
Taken together, these ﬁndings imply that the 60% deﬁcit
in -cell mass observed in the present study, particularly
in the context of insulin resistance encountered in type 2
diabetes, is sufﬁcient to play an important role in causing
hyperglycemia. In the current study, we report that the
group with IFG, a group at high risk of developing type 2
diabetes, had a 40% deﬁcit in relative -cell volume compared with comparably obese control subjects with normal fasting glucose concentrations. This observation
implies that the deﬁcit in the -cell volume (and presumptive mass) is an early process in the development of type
2 diabetes and is likely of primary importance rather than
simply secondary to hyperglycemia.
-Cell mass in rodents is dynamic and regulated with
input of -cells from new islet formation and -cell replication within islets and output from -cell senescence
(apoptosis) (10,11). Our data support this concept and
extend it to humans. Also, we support prior data reporting
that obese nondiabetic humans increase -cell mass, presumably in response to insulin resistance (8,9). However,
the extent of this increase (50%) in the markedly obese
humans studied here is much lower than the increase
observed in obese mice (5- to 10-fold) (34). The reported
increase here may, however, be an underestimate, since
the pancreatic weight in obese nondiabetic humans tends
to be larger than lean nondiabetic humans (9). Again, this
would introduce a conservative error in the stated conclusion that -cell mass is increased in obese nondiabetic
versus lean nondiabetic humans. We report that the mechanism of this increased -cell mass in humans appears to
be through increased new islet formation, assuming that
the percentage of insulin-positive cells in exocrine ducts is
related to this process. However, in contrast to rodents, it
has been reported that there is almost no -cell replication
within existing islets in humans (35), as conﬁrmed in the
present work, and therefore (not surprisingly) this does
not appear to be an important mechanism for regulation of
-cell mass in humans. The relatively less importance of
this pathway for regulation of -cell mass in humans
compared with rodents is consistent with the observation
that obese mice develop very large islets (34,36), whereas
in humans, islet size is minimally altered by obesity (Table
3). The frequency of apoptosis was not different in the
FIG. 4. The mean FPG concentration (A) and the relative -cell volume
(B) in the lean group of nondiabetic (ND) subjects or diabetic patients
who were treated with insulin, sulfonylurea pills (Oral), or diet only.
-CELL DEFICIT IN TYPE 2 DIABETES
106
DIABETES, VOL. 52, JANUARY 2003
obese nondiabetic versus lean nondiabetic humans (Table
3). In conclusion, -cell mass is regulated in humans, with
the rate of new islet formation apparently the predominant
pathway for increased -cell mass in response to obesity.
To elucidate the underlying mechanism of the relative
loss of -cell mass in type 2 diabetes, we also examined
the frequency of new islet formation as well as -cell
replication and apoptosis in islets from each group. Rodent studies have shown that increased rates of -cell
replication can contribute to compensatory increases in
-cell mass, for example in response to partial pancreatectomy (28) or short-term glucose infusions (37,38). We did
not observe a decreased frequency of -cell replication in
islets of type 2 diabetic versus nondiabetic cases, although
it might be argued that in the presence of hyperglycemia,
there should have been an increased frequency of replication if human islets respond in the same manner as rodent
islets. The capacity for increased rates of -cell replication
is diminished in the Otsuka-Long-Evans-Tokushima fatty
rat model of diabetes (39). It has also been reported that
genetic background inﬂuences the capacity for increased
rates of -cell replication in other animal studies (40).
However, given the extremely low frequency of -cell
replication present in human islets compared with rodent
islets, it appears that this important mechanism for regulation of -cell mass in rodents is unimportant in humans.
There is increasing interest in the process of new islet
formation from exocrine ducts as a mechanism to replenish or increase -cell mass (10,11,41,42). We observed new
islet formation from exocrine ducts and scattered single
-cells in all cases in the present study consistent with
recent (42) and some much older studies in humans (43).
There was no difference in the percentage of exocrine duct
cells positive for insulin in type 2 diabetic versus nondiabetic subjects, in either the lean or obese groups. This
implies that the mechanism that enhances new islet formation in response to obesity is intact in humans with type
2 diabetes. In animal models, both an acute decrease in
-cell mass (partial pancreatectomy [41]) and hyperglycemia (38) induce an increase in new islet formation. As
patients with type 2 diabetes had both a decreased -cell
mass and hyperglycemia, it could be argued that there is a
FIG. 5. Section of pancreas (20 magniﬁcation) stained for insulin. Numerous pancreatic ducts are shown, with insulin-positive cells present in
the duct walls demonstrating new islet formation from exocrine ducts.
FIG. 6. The relative rate of new islet formation, estimated by fraction
of duct cells positive for insulin, in the obese and lean groups. ND,
nondiabetic; TTDM, type 2 diabetes.
A.E. BUTLER AND ASSOCIATES
DIABETES, VOL. 52, JANUARY 2003
107
failure of compensatory increased new islet formation in
type 2 diabetes. However, the mechanisms that induce an
increased rate of new islet formation in response to a
partial decrease in -cell mass and hyperglycemia in
rodents are not known, nor is it known whether such
adaptive changes occur in humans. Also, it is unknown
whether these adaptive increased rates of new islet formation are sustained over years (as in humans with
diabetes) as opposed to weeks (as in rodent studies of
hyperglycemia). One very positive implication from the
present studies is that the rate of new islet formation is
sustained in patients with longstanding diabetes. In fact,
there was no difference in the rate of new islet formation
versus age in patients with or without type 2 diabetes.
These data imply that if the increased rate of apoptosis
present in type 2 diabetes (vida infra) could be inhibited, it
should be possible to restore -cell mass in these patients.
Since new islet formation, the predominant input into
the -cell mass in humans, appears to be intact in type 2
diabetes, one might predict that the mechanism for the
decreased -cell mass in type 2 diabetes is an increase in
-cell apoptosis. Consistent with this, we report a 3-fold
increased frequency of -cell apoptosis in obese cases of
type 2 diabetes and a 10-fold increased frequency in lean
cases of type 2 diabetes compared with the nondiabetic
control cases. The increased frequency of apoptotic events
per islet in type 2 diabetes is relatively low (0.3 cells per
cross section), raising the question: is this sufﬁcient to
account for the decreased -cell mass in type 2 diabetes?
The difﬁculty presented by both the frequency measurements of apoptosis by the TUNEL technique as well as the
replication by Ki67 is that they do not easily translate into
rates. From time-lapse video microscopy studies using
-cell lines (R.R., P.C.B., unpublished observations), we
have observed that apoptosis takes 120 min from initiation to completion (disintegration of the cell). The nuclear
debris might still stain positively by the TUNEL method
after this period, but in the present studies, we only included TUNEL-positive events when the staining was
present in an identiﬁable cell (see RESEARCH DESIGN AND
METHODS) and did not include the staining of debris that
was occasionally present. If we make the crude assumption that the 60% loss of -cell mass observed in type 2
diabetes in the current study takes 5 years to evolve, the
net loss of -cells per islet per day would be 0.8 cells per
islet per day (assuming 3,000 -cells/islet). Given the fact
that each islet cross section only observes a portion of a
given islet, the frequency of an excess of 0.3 apoptotic
cells per islet seen here is potentially sufﬁcient to account
for the degree of -cell loss.
If the cause of the decreased -cell mass in type 2
diabetes is increased -cell apoptosis, what is the mechanism of this? One of the features present in islets of most
humans
with
type
2
diabetes
is
amyloid
deposits
(22,25,44–48) derived from IAPP, also known as amylin
(13). The role of islet amyloid in the pathogenesis of type
2 diabetes remains controversial. Several lines of evidence
support a potential role of IAPP in the pathophysiology of
-cell loss in type 2 diabetes. First, spontaneous type 2
FIG. 7. The frequency of -cell replication (A) and -cell apoptosis (B)
normalized to relative -cell volume in each case. ND, nondiabetic;
TTDM, type 2 diabetes.
FIG. 8. Correlations of age versus -cell replication (A) and insulinpositive duct cells (B). Solid lines are best ﬁt, with broken lines
showing 95% CIs.
-CELL DEFICIT IN TYPE 2 DIABETES
108
DIABETES, VOL. 52, JANUARY 2003
diabetes occurs in humans, monkeys, and cats, all of
which share close homology in IAPP sequence and have
IAPP that spontaneously forms amyloid ﬁbrils in an aqueous environment (45–48). Species such as rats and mice
that have an IAPP sequence that does not form ﬁbrils in an
aqueous solution (49) do not spontaneously develop type 2
diabetes, but instead require selective genetic manipulation (e.g., leptin-deﬁcient mice) to develop diabetes (50).
Furthermore, it has been shown that IAPP oligomers
cause -cell apoptosis (14,15), possibly by causing nonselective ion-channel leaks in cell membranes (16). Although
it is not plausible to collect pancreatic tissue prospectively
from humans, transgenic mice (for human IAPP) are now
available which, when obese, spontaneously develop diabetes characterized by islet amyloid and decreased -cell
mass (51). Prospective studies in these mice support the
hypothesis that the mechanism of the decreased -cell
mass is increased apoptosis (34).
One argument that has been made against the pathogenic importance of both islet amyloid in type 2 diabetes
and cerebral amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease is that not all
affected cases have amyloid present. In the current study,
10% of type 2 diabetes had no islet amyloid present in the
examined sample. Furthermore, only a minority (10%) of
the cases with IFG had islet amyloid present, while they
already had a deﬁcit in presumptive -cell mass of 40%.
These data are consistent with the previously stated
hypothesis that small IAPP oligomers (not detectable by
light microscopy) are the cause of -cell loss, whereas the
large extracellular amyloid deposits visible by light microscopy are inert (16,25). Alternatively, it is possible that
the formation of islet amyloid is secondary to hyperglycemia and not of primary importance in the pathophysiology
of type 2 diabetes.
Another factor that might contribute to the increased
rate of apoptosis observed in type 2 diabetes might be
hyperglycemia. Recently, it has been shown that islets
exposed to high glucose concentrations have an increased
rate of apoptosis (52). This mechanism could certainly
compound the effects of IAPP oligomers once hyperglycemia supervenes. Since hyperglycemia and insulin resistance increase the expression rate of IAPP to a greater
extent than insulin (53,54), hyperglycemia might also
further enhance apoptosis due to IAPP oligomers.
In summary, we report that relative -cell volume, and
therefore the presumptive -cell mass, is decreased in
both obese and lean humans with type 2 diabetes compared with their nondiabetic age- and weight-matched
counterparts. In the current study, this decrease is present
whether the cases were treated by insulin, sulfonylureas,
or diet. Furthermore, humans with IFG have a decreased
relative -cell volume, suggesting that this is an early
process and mechanistically important in the development
of type 2 diabetes. Finally, we ascribe the mechanism for
the decrease in -cell mass to an increase in the frequency
of -cell apoptosis with the rate of new islet formation
being unaffected. The implication for prevention of type 2
diabetes is that strategies that avoid the increased frequency of -cell apoptosis are most rational. Also, in
people with established type 2 diabetes, inhibition of this
3- to 10-fold increased rate of apoptosis may lead to
restoration of -cell mass since islet neogenesis appears
intact. To realize these goals, further studies to appreciate
the mechanism of increased -cell apoptosis are warranted.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was funded by grants from the National Institutes of Health (DK59579 to P.C.B., DK29953 to R.A.R., and
DK44523 to S.B.W.).
We gratefully acknowledge the technical assistance of
Jane Kahl (Mayo Clinic) and Chand Sultana (University of
Southern California). We appreciate help from John Miles
(Mayo Clinic) with chart reviews.
