88
Volume 13, Number 2
Rabi’ al-Awwal 1428 H
April 2007
The Saudi Journal of
Gastroenterology
Candida Esophagitis in Achalasia Cardia: Case Report and 
Review of Literature
Praveen Kumar, Suyash Mohan, Ashish Verma, Sanjay S. Baijal
Department of 
Radiodiagnosis, Sanjay 
Gandhi Postgraduate 
Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Raebareily Road, 
Lucknow - 226 014, India
Address: 
Address: 
Dr. Sanjay Saran Baĳ al, 
Department of 
Radiodiagnosis, Sanjay 
Gandhi Postgraduate 
Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Rae Bareily Road, 
Lucknow - 226 014, U.P, 
India.
E-mail: ssbaĳ al@sgpgi.ac.in
ABSTRACT
Candida albicans is by far the most common cause of infectious esophagitis. In most patients, this infection is 
secondary to an immuno-compromised state. In nearly 25% of the cases, underlying causes of esophageal stasis, 
e.g., achalasia and scleroderma, facilitate fungal colonization of the esophagus. Double contrast esophagography 
is a highly sensitive tool for diagnosing candida esophagitis. This report discusses the uncommon association 
of Candida esophagitis with achalasia cardia, their radiographic features and a short review of the available 
literature. 
Key Words: Achalasia cardia, Candida esophagitis, double contrast esophagography, endoscopy 
Received 28.11.2006, Accepted 08.02.2007
The Saudi Journal of Gastroenterology 2007 13(2):88-90
Case
Case Report
Report
INTRODUCTION
Candida esophagitis most frequently develops 
in immunocompromised patients but occasionally 
it complicates food stasis in patients with achalasia, 
scleroderma or peptic stricture.[1] The association of achalasia 
with Candida esophagitis is quite uncommon and an early 
diagnosis is mandated for adequate treatment of both these 
entities and for preventing the risk of metaplasia.[2] Real 
time barium swallow is the modality of choice to depict 
the manifestations of altered physiology in achalasia and 
supplement the findings of manometry.[3] In addition, a 
double contrast barium esophagogram can help assess the 
mucosal pathology caused by candidiasis and taper down 
the differential diagnosis.[3] Endoscopy with sampling for 
cytological / microbiological evaluation is however, the 
conclusive way to establish the diagnosis. 
CASE REPORT
We report a 45 year old male who presented with dysphagia 
both to solids and liquids for the last two years with which 
occasional odynophagia, intermittent regurgitation and 
aspiration were associated. There was also a complaint of 
fever, chest pain and significant weight loss for the last one 
year. Past history of the patient was non-contributory and 
there was no history suggestive of immunosuppression. 
General physical examination was unremarkable except for 
pallor and mild hepatomegaly. Oral mucosa, skin and nails 
were healthy. Chest X-ray showed absent gastric fundal 
air bubble, widened superior mediastinum, straightened 
right mediastinal border with an air fluid level in the upper 
mediastinum. On the basis of clinical and chest radiographic 
findings, a provisional diagnosis of achalasia cardia was 
made. Single and double contrast barium esophagography 
using barium sulphate suspension (Microbar HD Eskay fine 
chemicals, Mumbai, India) was done under fluoroscopic 
control using a standard protocol. Filming was done in 
the erect position for the double contrast and in the prone 
position for single contrast studies. These studies showed 
grossly dilated esophagus almost along its entire length 
with gradual tapering at its lower end with slow and delayed 
passage of barium through the gastro-esophageal (GE) 
junction into the stomach, resembling a bird’s beak or a 
rat’s tail typical of achalasia cardia. Primary and secondary 
peristaltic waves were absent with tertiary contractions being 
the major peristaltic waves in esophagus. “Milking effect” 
was seen at the gastro-esophageal junction. A suspicion 
of mucosal irregularity was raised for which a double 
contrast study was done which revealed the presence of 
multiple small ulcers with mucosal nodularity [Figure 1]. 
On performing upper gastro-intenstinal endoscopy, the 
findings of the barium examination were confirmed. The GE 
junction was tight suggestive of motor dysphagia with white 
Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/sjga by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AW
nYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI= on 01/14/2025
The Saudi Journal of
Gastroenterology
89
Volume 13, Number 2
Rabi’ al-Awwal 1428 H
April 2007
patches along the entire length of the esophagus [Figure 
2]. The esophageal mucosa had a friable, erythematous 
appearance with multiple small ulcers located in relation to 
the white plaques. Stomach and duodenum were normal. 
Microbiologic cultures of brushings obtained from the 
esophagus were positive for candidiasis. A manometeric 
examination followed by graded balloon dilatations of the 
esophagus for treatment of achalasia was conducted. The 
patient was put on antifungal therapy and was improving till 
the last outpatient attendance. Follow up clinical, imaging 
and endoscopic pictures revealed resolution of fungal 
etiology and reduction in severity of achalasia cardia.
DISCUSSION
Candida albicans is by far the most common cause of 
infectious esophagitis. Most patients with Candida 
esophagitis are immunocompromised as a result of 
underlying malignancy, AIDS or treatment with radiation, 
chemotherapy, steroids or other cytotoxic agents.[2] In nearly 
25% of the cases, conditions like achalasia cardia, scleroderma 
etc. cause esophageal stasis that facilitate fungal colonization 
of the esophagus with subsequent esophagitis.[1] Prolonged 
untreated achalasia was the predisposing condition for 
candidial infection in the present report as discussed by 
Holt.[4]
Achalasia cardia is a motor disorder of esophagus generally 
occurring in the 35-50 year old age group. It is caused 
by degeneration of neurons in the Auerbach’s plexus 
leading to failure of primary and secondary peristalses. 
Tertiary contractions subsequently develop with failure of 
relaxation of lower esophageal sphincter (LES). Both these 
factors together lead to stasis of food and secretions in the 
esophagus, which when prolonged may get complicated with 
growth of Candida albicans leading to Candida esophagitis.[2] 
The esophagus may undergo marked dilation with a tortuous 
course (i.e., sigmoid-shaped esophagus).[5]
Radiographically, as in our case, an esophagus with severe 
and long standing achalasia may form fluid levels and 
a foamy appearance in the mediastinum on plain chest 
film.[1] The right mediastinal border is straightened or even 
deviated laterally. Primary and secondary peristalses are 
absent on single contrast swallow with appearance of tertiary 
contractions in the lower half of esophagus. The incomplete 
opening of LES is depicted in the barium study as a sharp, 
smooth, tapered segment at the lower end of esophagus, 
described as a “rat tail” or “bird beak appearance”.[2] A dilated 
esophagus is often seen and may have a “sigmoid appearance” 
in late phases.[5] Achalasia cardia must be differentiated from 
other causes of narrowing occurring at the lower end of 
esophagus such as peptic stricture, neoplasm, complicated 
scleroderma, Chagas’ disease and postvagotomy effect. In the 
present case, prolonged accumulation of food and secretions 
secondary to achalasia cardia, led to candidial colonization 
and esophagitis which was confirmed by a double contrast 
esophagogram and endoscopy. 
A double contrast barium study has been shown to have 
sensitivity of 90% in the diagnosis of mucosal pathology 
including Candida esophagitis.[1,3] It is usually manifested as 
linear or irregular plaque-like lesions separated by segments 
of normal intervening mucosa. In more advanced disease, 
coalescent plaques may produce a “cobblestone” or “snake 
skin” appearance. There may be trapping of barium in 
between plaques and pseudomembranes.[1] Differentials 
of Candida esophagitis include herpes esophagitis, reflux 
Figure 1: Double contrast barium esophagogram AP projection showing 
dilated esophagus with distal bird beak / rat tail taper, multiple ulcers 
and mucosal nodularity
Figure 2: Upper GI endoscopy showing white patches with punctate 
ulcerations in the background of friable, erythematous mucosa
Candida esophagitis in Achalasia cardia 
Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/sjga by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AW
nYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI= on 01/14/2025
90
Volume 13, Number 2
Rabi’ al-Awwal 1428 H
April 2007
The Saudi Journal of
Gastroenterology
esophagitis, artifacts from air bubbles and residual adherent 
food particles.[2,4] The endoscopy of this patient showed the 
presence of a bubbly foam filling the esophagus adherent to 
its wall. The underlying mucosa was friable and erythematous 
with punctate ulcers at a few sites. These are the classical 
findings described in literature for Candida esophagitis.[1]
 
Although the development of candidiasis in the obstructed 
esophagus is uncommon, some literature reviews and 
infrequent case reports suggest such an association. This 
report reinforces the facts that long-standing stasis in the 
esophagus can lead to secondary opportunistic infective 
esophagitis, Candida being the most common. Single and 
double contrast esophagogram can diagnose these conditions 
accurately thus helping in early installation of antifungal 
therapy. We wish to highlight the occurrence of candidiasis 
in the presence of esophageal obstruction in our case which 
is consistent with many reported in literature and to illustrate 
the radiological findings in these cases.
