Circadian and feeding rhythms differentially affect
rhythmic mRNA transcription and translation in
mouse liver
Florian Atgera,b,1, Cédric Gobeta,c,1, Julien Marquisd, Eva Martina, Jingkui Wangc, Benjamin Wegera, Grégory Lefebvred,
Patrick Descombesd,e, Felix Naefc,2, and Frédéric Gachona,e,2
aDepartment of Diabetes and Circadian Rhythms, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; bDepartment of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, University of Lausanne, CH-1011 Lausanne, Switzerland; cInstitute of Bioengineering, School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de
Lausanne and Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; dFunctional Genomic, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, CH-1015 Lausanne,
Switzerland; and eFaculty of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
Edited by Patrick Emery, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, and accepted by the Editorial Board October 9, 2015 (received for review
August 3, 2015)
Diurnal oscillations of gene expression are a hallmark of rhythmic
physiology across most living organisms. Such oscillations are controlled by the interplay between the circadian clock and feeding
rhythms. Although rhythmic mRNA accumulation has been extensively studied, comparatively less is known about their transcription
and translation. Here, we quantified simultaneously temporal transcription, accumulation, and translation of mouse liver mRNAs under
physiological light–dark conditions and ad libitum or night-restricted
feeding in WT and brain and muscle Arnt-like 1 (Bmal1)-deficient
animals. We found that rhythmic transcription predominantly drives
rhythmic mRNA accumulation and translation for a majority of
genes. Comparison of wild-type and Bmal1 KO mice shows that circadian clock and feeding rhythms have broad impact on rhythmic
gene expression, Bmal1 deletion affecting surprisingly both transcriptional and posttranscriptional levels. Translation efficiency is differentially regulated during the diurnal cycle for genes with
5′-Terminal Oligo Pyrimidine tract (5′-TOP) sequences and for genes
involved in mitochondrial activity, many harboring a Translation Initiator of Short 5′-UTR (TISU) motif. The increased translation efficiency
of 5′-TOP and TISU genes is mainly driven by feeding rhythms but
Bmal1 deletion also affects amplitude and phase of translation, including TISU genes. Together this study emphasizes the complex interconnections between circadian and feeding rhythms at several steps
ultimately determining rhythmic gene expression and translation.
circadian rhythms | ribosome profiling | mRNA translation |
5′-TOP sequences | TISU motifs
L
iving organisms on Earth are subjected to light–dark cycles
caused by rotation of the Earth around the sun. To anticipate
these changes, virtually all organisms have acquired a circadian
timing system during evolution that allows a better adaptation to
their environment. As a consequence, most aspects of their physiology are orchestrated in a rhythmic way by the circadian clock
(from the Latin circa diem, meaning “about a day”), an endogenous
and autonomous oscillator with a period of around 24 h (1, 2). Not
surprisingly, perturbations of this clock in mammals lead to pathologies including psychiatric, metabolic, and vascular disorders (1,
3, 4). At the organismal scale, the oscillatory clockwork is organized
in a hierarchal manner. Within the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of
the hypothalamus, the “master clock” receives light input via the
retina and communicates timing signals to “enslave” oscillators in
peripheral organs (1, 2). The molecular oscillator consists of interconnected transcriptional and translational feedback loops, in which
multiple layers of control, including temporal posttranscriptional
and posttranslational regulation, play important roles (5). These
additional layers of regulation are largely coordinated by systemic
cues originating from circadian clock and/or feeding-coordinated
rhythmic metabolism, allowing the adjustment of the molecular
clockwork with the metabolic state of the cell (6). During the last
decades, efforts have been made to produce a comprehensive
knowledge of the transcriptional regulation orchestrated by the
circadian clock (7–9) and feeding rhythms (10, 11). More recently,
additional layers of regulation at the translational (12, 13) and
posttranslational (14) levels have been described, increasing the
complexity of the phenomenon involved in the establishment of the
rhythmic mRNA expression and protein synthesis landscapes.
To gain more insight into potential rhythmic coordination at all
stages of mRNA regulation, we monitored simultaneously mRNA
transcription, accumulation, and translation using total RNA sequencing and ribosome profiling (15, 16).We describe here a
modified protocol of this technique that allows deep sequencing
of ribosome-protected mRNA fragments rapidly and with high
throughput from mouse tissues. We measured transcription, accumulation, and translation of mouse liver mRNAs under different
feeding rhythms and in clock-deficient animals. In this way, we
Significance
Rhythmic gene regulation in mouse liver results from an intertwined relationship between feeding cycles and the circadian clock.
Significant efforts have been made to understand this interaction
but a complete picture of the resulting diurnal transcription–translation processes is still missing. Through the simultaneous quantification of temporal transcription, accumulation, and translation of
mRNA in the liver, we investigated the regulatory landscape of
mice with intact or deficient circadian clock subjected to different
feeding regimens. We showed that circadian clock and feeding
rhythms coordinate rhythmic transcription to drive downstream
rhythmic mRNA accumulation and translation. However, a subset
of genes harboring 5′-Terminal Oligo Pyrimidine tract or Translation
Initiator of Short 5′-UTR elements encoding proteins involved in
translation and mitochondrial activity, respectively, present a
transcription-independent rhythmic translation mainly regulated
by feeding.
Author contributions: F.N. and F.G. designed research; F.A., J.M., E.M., and B.W. performed research; F.A., C.G., J.M., J.W., G.L., P.D., F.N., and F.G. analyzed data; and F.A.,
C.G., F.N., and F.G. wrote the paper.
Conflict of interest statement: F.A., C.G., J.M., E.M., B.W., G.L., P.D., and F.G. are employees
of Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences SA.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission. P.E. is a guest editor invited by the Editorial
Board.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
Data deposition: The data reported in this paper have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo (accession no. GSE73554).
1F.A. and C.G. contributed equally to this work.
2To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: felix.naef@epfl.ch or frederic.gachon@
rd.nestle.com.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1515308112/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1515308112
PNAS
|
Published online November 9, 2015
|
E6579–E6588
SYSTEMS BIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
showed that rhythmic transcription drives predominantly rhythmic
mRNA accumulation and translation for a majority of genes. The
study of WT and brain and muscle Arnt-like 1 (Bmal1) KO mice
shows that the interconnection between circadian clock and feeding
rhythms has broad impacts on rhythmic genes expression. Surprisingly, Bmal1 deletion seems to alter posttranscriptional level more
importantly than transcription. In addition, it seems that global
mRNA accumulation drives translation whereas a small subset of
genes presents a diurnal change in their translation efficiency. These
genes are involved in translation or mitochondrial activity and
harbor a 5′-Terminal Oligo Pyrimidine tract (5′-TOP) or Translation Initiator of Short 5′-UTR (TISU) motif, respectively. Their
rhythmic translation efficiency is mainly driven by feeding rhythms
and food restriction increases their amplitudes and temporal coordination. However, Bmal1 deletion also affects amplitudes and
phases of mRNA translation, notably for TISU genes. By measuring
simultaneously all of the aspects of mRNA regulation, this study
shows for the first time to our knowledge the role of circadian and
feeding rhythms in the establishment of rhythmic mRNA and protein synthesis.
Results
Ribosome Profiling Around the Diurnal Cycle in Mouse Liver. To
monitor temporal mRNA transcription, accumulation, and
translation, we extracted total RNA and ribosome-protected
mRNA fractions from livers of individual mice every 2 h under
ad libitum feeding (ALF). In parallel, the same experiment was
performed every 4 h in WT and Bmal1 KO animals under a
night-restricted feeding (RF) regimen. In total, 84 samples were
subjected to RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) and ribosome profiling (Ribo-Seq) (Fig. 1A). For RNA-Seq, intronic reads provide
a good proxy for transcription rate and exonic reads for mRNA
abundance (17). Owing to the large number of samples, we developed a simplified and faster protocol for ribosome profiling
library generation, similar to that in ref. 18. Briefly, ribosome
footprints (RFPs) ends were modified with polynucleotide kinase to generate libraries using 5′- and 3′- mRNA adapters. The
quality and reproducibility of the resulting Ribo-Seq libraries
were high (Fig. S1), showing a low percentage of PCR duplicates
and minor sequence-dependent ligation (Fig. S2).
Overall, Ribo-Seq reads mapped mainly on coding DNA sequences (CDSs) (Fig. 1B) with a mean footprint size surrounding
32 nucleotides (Fig. 1C), consistent with previous results obtained
in mammalian cells or tissues (18–21) as well as with ribosome size. Biological reproducibility for both RNA-Seq and
Ribo-Seq was high (Fig. 1D; R2 of 0.97 and 0.96, respectively).
Moreover, mRNA abundance and total ribosome density still
exhibited fairly high correlation (R2 = 0.73), highlighting both
the overall proportionality between number of translating ribosomes and number of transcripts, as well as gene-specific translational kinetics (initiation or elongation). Finally, densities of
ribosome footprints at the starts and ends of CDSs in proteincoding transcripts exhibited the expected trinucleotide repeat,
reflecting the main ORF and the three-nucleotide movement of
the ribosomes (Fig. 1E). Together, these results emphasize that
this technique allows us to obtain with high throughput a highquality dataset that can be used to monitor simultaneously transcription, mRNA abundance, and translation in different conditions.
Rhythmic Ribosome Footprint Signal Is Mainly Driven by Rhythmic
mRNA Accumulation. We first investigated gene expression in ALF
mice. Considering some well-studied circadian clock-regulated genes
(e.g., Dbp) confirmed that our data are of high quality and showed
the expected rhythmicity for both RNA-Seq and Ribo-Seq (Fig. 2A).
As anticipated, circadian clock genes show rhythms at all stages, from
their respective pre-mRNAs to the accumulation of the mRNA and
downstream mRNA translation (Fig. 2B), confirming that translational regulation has a minor impact upon clock gene expression
(12). To assess and quantify rhythmic regulations at the different
steps, we developed computational models and classified genes
depending on the rhythmic or constant behavior at each measured
level (pre-mRNA, mRNA, and ribosome footprints) (Dataset S1).
For a great majority of genes, rhythmically translated mRNAs are
subjected to rhythmic mRNA accumulation and a significant part of
those (72%) exhibit rhythmic transcription (Fig. 2C).
We evaluated the impact of rhythmic translation on rhythmic
protein levels by comparing mRNA and RFP levels with recently
published protein levels (14). As described for rhythmic mRNAs,
the majority of rhythmic RFPs encoded nonrhythmic proteins, likely
as a consequence of long protein half-lives (Fig. S3). However, these
observed flat profiles in protein abundance do not necessarily indicate flat activity because, for example, newly synthesized proteins
can be more active than old oxidized proteins (22–24). Therefore,
total protein level quantified by mass spectrometry may not always
reflect rhythmic activity of newly synthesized protein originating
from rhythmic RFP accumulation. However, rhythmic RFP signals
typically show no significant delay with mRNA accumulation,
whereas an average delay of around 6 h is observed between RFP
signals and protein accumulation, as expected for relatively longlived proteins (Fig. 3C) (14).
A
B
C
D
E
Fig. 1.
Ribosome profiling around the diurnal cycle
in mouse liver. (A) Schematic representation of the
experiment. Total mRNAs are directly sequenced (top)
and ribosome loaded-mRNA are purified (ribosome
footprinting) before sequencing (bottom). RNA-Seq
from total RNA (genomic sequence is represented by a
black line, surrounded by RNA-Seq signal) is quantified
in intronic (red) and exonic (blue) regions to estimate
pre-mRNA and mRNA levels. Ribosome density is
quantified by modified ribosome profiling protocol.
(B) The overall fraction of uniquely mapped reads
(UMRs) of size between 28 and 34 bp up to one mismatch from the 84 Ribo-Seq samples in protein CDSs
and nonprotein coding regions. (C) Size distribution of
RFPs for UMR up to one mismatch. (D) Reproducibility
of biological replicates. (Left) Log2 of total normalized
counts (reads per kilobase per million, RPKM) for exonic RNA-Seq. (Middle) Ribo-Seq. (Right) Comparison
of RPKM for Ribo-Seq and exonic RNA-Seq for each
annotated protein coding gene (only UMR). R2 indicates Pearson correlation at the top of each panel.
(E) Density of 5′ ends of 32-nt ribosome footprints at
the starts and ends of ORFs shows three nucleotides
periodicity. Positions of the related E, P, and A sites of
the ribosomes are indicated.
E6580
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1515308112
Atger et al.
Among genes with rhythmic RFP levels that follow their corresponding mRNA accumulation, we observed three major groups
with distinct transcriptional behaviors (Fig. 2D) and phase specificity (Fig. 2E). Namely, Group A is composed of genes with the
same rhythmic parameters for introns and exons, introns and exons
of group B genes present different rhythmic parameters, and group
C genes are rhythmic only at the exonic level. Expression data for a
few examples of each model are presented in Fig. S4. Surprisingly,
each group shows specific gene ontology enrichment, suggesting a
close relationship between biological functions, time of expression,
and mode of rhythmic accumulation (Dataset S2). As described
previously (25), the main difference between mRNA accumulation
in groups A and B resulted from the different half-lives of these
mRNAs. We used RNA-Seq exon/intron ratios as proxies for relative mRNA half-lives and found that group A genes exhibited a
lower ratio than group B genes, suggesting shorter half-life (Fig.
2F). As a consequence of the increased stability of group B genes,
mRNA amplitudes were reduced compared with amplitudes of
pre-mRNAs (Fig. 2G). To summarize, group A genes reached
their maximum expression at the light–dark transition and coded for
short-lived mRNA that were mainly related to transcription and cell
signaling, in particular insulin signaling. Short half-lives for translation- or signaling-related mRNA are expected to generate the
required rapid responses to signals. In parallel, group B showed a
bimodal distribution of mRNA phases and was mainly composed of
genes with stable mRNAs that encode proteins involved in lipid and
carbohydrate metabolism. Finally, rhythmic regulation for group C
mRNA occurred only posttranscriptionally and concerns genes related to chromatin organization and mRNA metabolism, with sharp
phase specificity at the end of the light phase.
Bmal1 Deletion Affects Rhythmic mRNA Accumulation Transcriptionally
and Posttranscriptionally. To decipher the specific roles of the circadian clock and feeding rhythms on transcriptional regulation, we
performed the same experiment on Bmal1 KO mice under RF
(Dataset S1). To compare rhythmic pattern of genes in the two
different animal models at the pre-mRNA and mRNA levels, we
grouped genes into six groups according to the respective rhythmic
pattern at the transcriptional and posttranscriptional levels (Fig. 3).
These respective groups are composed of genes with constant premRNA and mRNA (light blue), constant pre-mRNA and rhythmic
mRNA (dark blue), rhythmic pre-mRNA and constant mRNA
(orange), rhythmic with the same rhythmic parameters pre-mRNA
and mRNA (red), rhythmic pre-mRNA and mRNA with different
rhythmic parameters (brown), and finally genes with very low expression levels or noisy transcription and accumulation (gray) that
cannot be included in any other category (Fig. 3A). It seems that
rhythmicity is globally preserved with only moderate increase of
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Fig. 2.
Rhythmic ribosome footprint signals are
mainly driven by rhythmic mRNA accumulation.
Model selection to assess rhythmicity is applied on
WT ad libitum datasets combining intronic, exonic,
and RFP signal. Harmonic regression is used with a
period of 24 h and 12 h. Genes are assigned to one
of the 29 models described in Fig. S5A. An arbitrary threshold of 0.4 is set on the BIC weight.
Genes with log2 RPKM >0 at the exon and RFP
levels are selected. (A) Exon RNA-Seq (Left) and
RFP (Right) signals for the circadian clock-regulated
Dbp gene. The two signals synchronously peak at
ZT10. (B) Pre-mRNA (red), mRNA (blue), and RFP
(black) signals in log2 RPKM for circadian clock core
genes and clock-controlled genes. (C) Number of
genes with rhythmic pre-mRNA, mRNA, and RFPs.
The largest group shows rhythms on all three levels.
(D) Three groups of genes showing identical mRNA
and RFP rhythms. Standardized relative expression is
indicated in green (low) and red (high). White and
black boxes represent light and dark periods,
respectively. (E) Phase distribution of the three
groups described in D. (F) Distribution of mRNA
(Exon)/pre-mRNA (Intron) ratios for the three
groups of genes. An increased ratio suggested a
more stable mRNA and longer half-life. A Welch′s
t test indicates that this ratio is significantly higher
in group B compare with groups A (P = 1·10−62)
and C (P = 1·10−49). (G) Distribution of pre-mRNA
(blue) and mRNA (red) amplitudes for the three
groups. Group B harbors decreased amplitude in
exons compare with introns (paired t test: P =
5·10−13) as a consequence of long half-lived transcripts, despite a general trend for higher amplitude.
Atger et al.
PNAS
|
Published online November 9, 2015
|
E6581
SYSTEMS BIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
temporally constant genes at the mRNA level in KO (light blue and
orange groups, Fig. 3A). However, we observed a decreased number
of genes in KO for which rhythmicity in WT is caused by posttranscriptional regulations (dark blue and brown groups, Fig. 3A),
suggesting that Bmal1 deletion also affects posttranscriptional regulation. To compare how the rhythmic pattern of each gene
changed between WT and KO animals, we studied their distribution among the five different groups reporting interesting patterns
(Fig. 3B). Although a majority of genes remained in the same group
as in WT, there was a clear spreading of the distribution of genes
among the groups, indicating that Bmal1 deletion affected the
general rhythmic pattern of genes. In addition, the expression phase
of both pre-mRNA and mRNA was shifted in the KO compared
with WT. However, this occurred in both directions, without clear
further specificity (Fig. 3 C and D). Interestingly, for genes
showing rhythmic patterns of expression in both WT and KO, the
amplitudes of such rhythms at the mRNA level were, on average,
clearly decreased in KO, whereas the amplitude of pre-mRNA was
slightly increased (Fig. 3 E and F).
Concerning the change of pattern of rhythmic gene expression
between WT and KO animals, one group was of particular interest, namely genes that were nonrhythmic at the pre-mRNA
and rhythmic at the mRNA levels in WT (dark blue group) and that
became rhythmic at both levels in the KO (red group). This group
of genes was the only group whose pattern was severely perturbed in
the KO (Fig. 3B). Interestingly, these genes tended to show transcription (pre-mRNA) rhythms with a period of at 12 h in WT (Fig.
3G) that morphed onto 24 h rhythms in the KO. It was previously
described that 12-h-period genes changed to 24-h period in circadian clock-deficient mice (26, 27). It is likely that the two peaks of
the 12-h rhythm are regulated by the circadian clock and feeding
rhythms, respectively, and that the circadian component disappeared
in the KO (27). Thus, the change of rhythmic pattern in this group
reflects such a change of periodicity.
Translation Efficiency Is Regulated During the Diurnal Cycle for Genes
with 5′-Terminal Oligo Pyrimidine Tract and Translation Initiator of
Short 5′-UTR Motifs. Although translation of most genes followed
mRNA accumulation (Fig. 2), we identified a subset of genes
exhibiting rhythmic translation efficiency in WT mice under the
ALF condition. Indeed, these genes showed rhythmic translation, but their mRNA accumulated at constant levels (Fig. 2C).
As we recently reported, ribosomal proteins (RPs) are translated
in a rhythmic manner from constantly accumulated mRNA (12).
We confirmed here that translation of RPs was regulated diurnally, as shown for Rps9 (Fig. 4A). Although some of the genes
with rhythmic translation efficiency exhibited rhythmic transcription, the vast majority showed constant transcription (Fig.
4B and Dataset S1). The genes with rhythmic translation efficiency showed a bimodal phase of translation and encompassed
two different main functions: The genes translated during the
day at around ZT 10 are related to mitochondrial functions, whereas
those translated at night around ZT 17 are related to the translation
machinery, including RPs (Fig. 4C and Dataset S2). These functional
clusters were enriched in genes harboring a TISU or 5′-TOP elements, respectively (Fig. 4D and Fig. S5). TISU elements have a
conserved translation initiation sequence preceded by an extremely short 5′-UTR, and direct efficient cap-dependent translation initiation without scanning, thus conferring an advantageous
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Fig. 3.
Effects of Bmal1 deletion on rhythmic mRNA
accumulation. Model selection to assess rhythmicity is applied on Bmal1 WT and KO RF dataset
combining intronic, exonic, and RFP signal. Harmonic regression is used with a period of 24 h.
Genes are assigned to one of the 877 models generated by the six conditions. A threshold of 0.1 is set
on the BIC weight. Genes with log2 RPKM >0 at the
exon and RFP levels in WT condition are selected.
(A) Genes are clustered in the six groups depending
of the model they were assigned and grouped in
function of their rhythmic pattern at the intronic
and exonic level: gray, genes not assigned in any
group; light blue, constant pre-mRNA and mRNA
levels; dark blue, constant pre-mRNA and rhythmic
mRNA; orange, rhythmic pre-mRNA and constant
mRNA; red, rhythmic pre-mRNA and mRNA; brown,
rhythmic
pre-mRNA
and
mRNA
with
different
rhythmic parameters. (B) Fraction of genes belonging in one of the five clusters in KO compared with
WT mice. Intensity of the blue color in each box
represents the conservation degree of behavior of
the genes between WT and KO, with darkest blue
corresponding to higher conservation. (C) Phase
distribution of rhythmic pre-mRNA in WT and KO
mice. (D) Phase distribution of rhythmic mRNA in
WT and KO mice. (E) Distribution of pre-mRNA
amplitudes in WT and KO mice. KO mice present
slightly increased amplitude compare with WT (paired
t test: P = 1·10−4). (F) Distribution of mRNA amplitudes in WT and KO mice. KO mice present decreased
amplitude compare with WT (paired t test: P = 1·10−32).
(G) Fourier transform is applied for genes belonging to
the dark blue cluster in WT and red in KO mice. Distribution of amplitude density for the 24-h and 12-h
harmonics are computed for WT animals. The high
component of the 12-h harmonic indicates a predominantly 12-h rhythmic pre-mRNA level (paired t test:
P = 2·10−6).
E6582
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1515308112
Atger et al.
mechanism under an inhibited translation state, as induced by nutrient starvation (28–30). However, target of rapamycin complex 1
(TORC1) has been shown to be the main regulator of TOP
mRNA translation through the phosphorylation of 4E-BP and
S6K proteins under nutrient availability conditions (31). Consistent with these observations, translation of TOP mRNAs occurs at the same phase as TORC1 activation (Fig. 4D and Fig.
S6), as described previously (12). In addition, we compared
translationally regulated genes with a study reporting on the effect
of Torin 1-induced inhibition of TORC1-dependent translation
(32). This showed that the translation of TOP genes was dramatically decreased, whereas the translation of TISU genes was
poorly affected (Fig. S5C). Notably, rhythmic RFP accumulation
exhibited variability across individual mice (Fig. 4 E and F),
reflecting individual feeding behavior in this condition (33). These
findings strengthened that idea that nutrient availability may affect
rhythmic translation of TOP and TISU mRNAs.
Rhythms in Translation Efficiency Are Sharpened Under RF. Because
nutrient availability is a key regulator of translation for both TISU
and TOP genes, we wondered whether RF would affect their
rhythmic translation efficiencies. Similar to the ALF condition, we
observed that rhythmically translated genes were enriched in TOP
and TISU genes involved in similar biological functions (Fig. 5A and
Datasets S1 and S2). Interestingly, rhythmic translation of TOP and
TISU genes exhibited a narrower phase with a higher amplitude
compared with ALF. Rhythmic translation of mitochondrial-related
TISU genes still occurred during the light phase in RF but presented an advanced phase (Fig. 5 B and C). In addition, the
translational rhythms of TOP and TISU genes seemed to be reinforced by RF in the individual mice, synchronously with the availability or absence of food, respectively (Fig. 5D). TORC1 and
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) activities were previously
shown to be synchronized to TOP and TISU translation, respectively, in response to nutrient availability (30, 31). We monitored
these activities through the rhythmic phosphorylation of RPS6 and
RAPTOR, showing increased coordination and amplitude under
RF (Fig. S6). Taken together, these results argue in favor of a
pivotal role of feeding rhythms on translation regulation of both
TISU and TOP mRNAs.
Bmal1 Deletion Affects Rhythmic mRNA Translation Only for a Subset
of Genes. We used the same model selection method described
for transcription to decipher differential translational regulation
in WT and KO mice (Dataset S1). Rhythmic mRNA translation
was globally conserved, although a small decrease was observed
for the proportion of rhythmically translated mRNAs in the KO
(Fig. 6A). Overall, genes had a tendency to follow the same
pattern of rhythmic translation. We noticed, however, genes that
exhibited rhythmic mRNA accumulation but constant or delayed
RFP signal in WT (orange and brown groups) but synchronized
mRNA and RFP signal in KO (red group) (Fig. 6B). This behavior
could be hypothetically the consequence of an absence of translational regulation in KO, potentially caused by perturbed expression of RNA-binding proteins that regulate this translation.
Interestingly, although the amplitudes of RFP signals of TOP
genes was not affected by the Bmal1 deletion, it seemed that
rhythmic translation of TISU genes showed slightly decreased
amplitude (Fig. 6 D and E). Consequently, TISU genes were more
enriched among the fraction of constantly translated mRNA (Fig. 6
A
B
C
D
E
F
Fig. 4.
Translation efficiency is regulated during
the diurnal cycle for genes with 5′-TOP and TISU
motifs. We used the same rhythmic analysis as in Fig.
2. (A) Exon RNA-Seq (Left) and RFP (Right) signals for
the ribosomal protein gene Rps9 show increased
translation during the dark phase. (B) Expression
heat map for the three genes groups showing
rhythmic RFP but constant mRNA levels. (Top) Constant transcription and mRNA abundance followed
by rhythmic translation. (Middle) Constant mRNA
abundance with similar rhythmic parameters for transcription and translation. (Bottom) Constant mRNA
abundance with differential rhythmic transcription and
translation. (C) Phase distribution of intronic and RFP
signals for genes in B. (D, Bottom) Log2 amplitudes and
phases of RFP signal for genes in B, colored by enriched
functions. (Top) Densities indicate respectively fraction
of TISU and TOP motifs at each phase. (E and F) Mean
of relative expression profiles across genes with TOP
(E) or TISU (F) motifs in D with phase respectively
between ZT15–20 and ZT7–13. Exonic signals are in
blue and RFPs signals in red.
Atger et al.
PNAS
|
Published online November 9, 2015
|
E6583
SYSTEMS BIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
B–E). This could be linked to the loss of rhythmic energy consumption observed in clock-disrupted animals (11). However,
overall, Bmal1 deletion had only a small effect in regulating
translation efficiency between WT and KO mice, with translation
rhythms mostly reflecting mRNA accumulation (Fig. 6F and
Dataset S1). We nevertheless identified 16 genes that showed
increased or decreased translation efficiency in KO mice, with no
clear evidence on the mechanism of such regulation (Fig. 6G).
A
B
C
D
Fig. 5.
Rhythms in translation efficiency are
sharpened under time RF. Model selection to
assess rhythmicity is applied on both WT RF
datasets pooled together, and uses intronic,
exonic, and RFP signals. Harmonic regression is
used with a period of 24 h. Genes are assigned to
one of the 15 models generated by the three
conditions. An arbitrary threshold of 0.4 is set on
the BIC weight. Genes with Log2 RPKM >0 at the
exon and RFP levels are selected. (A) Heat map for
the three genes groups showing rhythmic RFP
signals and constant mRNA level under RF. (Top)
Constant transcription and mRNA abundance followed by rhythmic translation. (Middle) Constant
mRNA abundance with similar rhythmic parameters for transcription and translation. (Bottom)
Constant mRNA abundance with differential
rhythmic transcription and translation. (B) Phase
distribution of intronic and RFP signals for genes in
A. (C, Bottom) Log2 amplitudes and phases of RFP
signal for genes in A, colored by enriched functions.
(Top) Densities indicate respectively fraction of TISU
and TOP motifs at each phase. (D) Mean of relative
expression profile across genes with TOP (Left) or
TISU (Right) motifs in B with phase respectively
between ZT15–20 and ZT4–10. Exonic signals are
in blue and RFPs signals in red.
A
C
D
E
B
F
G
Fig. 6.
Bmal1 deletion affects translation efficiency in a constrained group of genes. The rhythmic analysis used is the same as for Fig. 3. (A) Gray, genes not
assigned in any group; light blue, constant mRNA and RFP levels; dark blue, constant mRNA and rhythmic RFP; orange, rhythmic mRNA and constant RFP; red,
rhythmic mRNA and RFP; brown, rhythmic mRNA and RFP with different rhythmic parameters. (B) Fraction of genes belonging in one of the five clusters in KO
compared with WT mice. Intensity of the blue color in each box represents the conservation degree of behavior of the genes between WT and KO, with darkest blue
corresponding to higher conservation. Hypergeometric test for TOP and TISU enrichment in the different cluster is applied. P values for the best enrichments are
displayed in green and red for TISU and TOP motifs, respectively. (C) Heat map of the exonic and RFP signal for genes harboring a constant exonic and rhythmic RFP
signal in WT and KO mice. (Top) Rhythmic parameters of RFP signals are shared between WT and KO mice. (Bottom) Rhythmic parameters of RFP signals are different
between WT and KO mice. (D) Mean of relative RFP profiles across genes with TOP motifs in C with phase between ZT15–20 in WT (red) and KO (green) mice. Individual
genes are shown as thin lines. (E) Mean of relative RFP profiles across genes with TISU motifs in C with phase between ZT4–10 in WT (red) and KO (green) mice. Individual
genes are shown as thin lines. (F) Pearson correlation between RFP and fragmented exon RNA-Seq in WT and KO test. Translation is mainly dictated by mRNA pattern in
WT and KO. (G) Log2 ratio of RFP and fragmented exonic RNA-Seq signals (UMR) between WT and KO mice, taken as a measure of (relative) translation efficiency. Genes
showing a significantly (false discovery rate ≤0.05) increased (logFC < −0.5) or decreased (logFC > 0.5) in translation efficiency in KO mice are colored in blue and red, respectively.
E6584
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1515308112
Atger et al.
Discussion
Regulation of mRNA Accumulation by Circadian and Feeding Rhythms.
We took advantage of the RNA-Seq technology to decipher the
role of transcriptional and posttranscriptional regulations (17) in the
establishment of the diurnally rhythmic transcriptome in mouse liver.
We concluded that transcription is the main regulator of rhythmic
mRNA accumulation (66% of rhythmic mRNA are rhythmically
transcribed) (Fig. 2). Recent studies using different technologies to
address this question yielded divergent results (Table S1). Although
two studies concluded that transcriptional regulation constitutes the
main origin of rhythm mRNA accumulation (ref. 34 and this study),
two others concluded that this origin is mainly posttranscriptional (7,
35). Interestingly, analysis of these data through a new approach—
taking into account mRNA degradation—led to the observation that
∼70% of transcripts are not subjected to posttranscriptional regulation, in accordance with our conclusion (36). At this stage, it is difficult to conclude to what extent these differences depend on the
techniques used or data analysis pipelines. However, one key difference between these studies resides in the feeding conditions: nightrestricted in the first case (34) and ad libitum in the second one (7,
35). Feeding rhythms play a central role in the activation of metabolically regulated pathways and transcription factors, as exemplified
by the regulation of SREBP (37, 38). It is therefore possible that
night-restricted feeding contributes to increased amplitude and coordination of rhythmic transcription in addition to its role in rhythmic
mRNA translation for a particular subset of genes. As a consequence, RF decreased the influence of posttranscriptional regulation on mRNA accumulation compared with ALF, as suggested by
the higher proportion of rhythmic mRNAs originating from rhythmic
transcription. This conclusion is consistent with previous reports that
night- or day-restricted feeding increases the number of cycling
transcripts as well as the amplitude of their mRNA accumulation
in mouse liver (10, 11).
Concerning diurnally rhythmic genes, we observed a clear relationship between the mode of rhythmic accumulation, notably
related to mRNA half-life, the phase preferences, and the biological
functions (Fig. 2). Correlations between mRNA stability and biological function are well-described in different animal cell models
(39, 40). In particular, cells can rapidly change the levels of mRNAs
coding for proteins involved in signaling and transcription, whereas
longer-lived mRNAs coding for proteins involved in metabolism
can contribute to damp fluctuations in the induction of such genes.
In our analysis, genes showing short delay (short half-lives) between
transcription and mRNA accumulation tended to code for signaling
proteins linked with food response (such as insulin signaling) and
were expressed at the day/night transition. Meanwhile, genes with
longer delays (longer half-lives) between transcription and mRNA
accumulation tended to be involved in metabolism and showed a
biphasic distribution of phases with peaks at the end of the light and
dark periods. These two phases could be explained by the required
separation of incompatible metabolic processes (41). A last group of
genes coded for proteins involved in chromatin organization and
peaked at the end of the light period. Interestingly, genes involved
in chromatin organization, like histones, are known to be regulated
at the posttranscriptional level with a large increase in accumulation
in S phase (42). Thus, it may be that the increased accumulation of
these mRNA is linked to the observed rhythmic DNA synthesis that
occurred in rodent liver (43, 44).
In addition, the analysis of Bmal1 KO animals allowed us to study
the role of the circadian clock on rhythmic mRNA accumulation.
Our results showed that Bmal1 deletion, although affecting the
phases and amplitudes of many rhythmic genes, induced relatively
moderate changes, which was reminiscent of previous studies
showing that the ClockΔ19 mutation had a globally minor effect on
rhythmic transcripts (45). More surprisingly, it seemed that Bmal1
deletion had a significant impact at the posttranscriptional regulation of mRNA levels. It was recently shown that posttranscriptional
modifications involving pre-mRNA metabolism or miRNAs can
influence rhythmic genes pattern (13, 46, 47). To which extent these
processes are controlled by the circadian clock is presently not
understood. Analysis of another genotype, the Cry1/Cry2 KO,
showed that global rhythmic mRNA accumulation was strongly
perturbed (11). However, these experiments were performed
under ad libitum feeding and constant darkness conditions. Such
conditions are very likely to induce arrhythmia in these animals
(48), whereas our experiments were performed under light–dark
cycles and night feeding conditions to separate feeding behavior
and clock-related effects. It is thus likely that the arrhythmic
feeding is responsible of the major disturbance of rhythmic
mRNA accumulation observed in Cry1/Cry2 KO (11).
Mechanisms of Rhythmic Translational Regulation. Although rhythmic coordination of transcription and mRNA accumulation has
been extensively studied during the last decades, rhythmic translation has been described only recently in mammals. Indeed, it has
been shown that the TORC1 pathway is rhythmically activated in
mouse liver (12, 49), hippocampus (50), and SCN (51), influencing
in this way rhythmic ribosome biogenesis (12) or light response and
circadian behavior (52, 53). Moreover, the circadian clock, in coordination with feeding rhythms, seems to play a modulating role in
this activation (12, 54, 55). Although we confirmed the rhythmic
activation of the TORC1 pathway in mouse liver, it seemed that
Bmal1 deletion had no effect on the rhythms of TOP genes translation; in particular, the amplitudes were indistinguishable (Fig.
6D). Even though this observation seems contradictory to our
previously published results showing that rhythmic RP accumulation is perturbed in the liver of clock-disrupted mice (12), it is important to note that RP synthesis is only one part of the ribosome
biogenesis. Indeed, it comprises numerous steps including rRNA
synthesis and maturation and ribosome assembly that strongly influence RP stability and accumulation (56). Interestingly, recent
results from our laboratory show that these steps are also rhythmic
and, at least in part, under circadian clock control. It is therefore
possible that these clock-regulated processes influence rhythmic RP
stability and accumulation and explain this apparent discrepancy.
A recent study showed that the circadian clock can directly regulate mRNA translation through the direct interaction of BMAL1
with the translation machinery. As a consequence, total mRNA
translation follows a global rhythmic pattern that is lost in the liver
of Bmal1 KO mice, which also show decreased mRNA translation
throughout the day (57). To date, we and others have also shown
that global translation is rhythmic in mouse liver (12, 58, 59).
However, the RFP experiments presented here, which measure
relative translation efficiencies, highlight that diurnal relative
changes in translation are predominantly regulated by transcriptional regulation and feeding rhythms. Indeed, the amplitudes
associated with diurnally regulated translation efficiencies seemed
to be only moderately affected by the deletion of Bmal1 (Fig. 6 D
and E) and differential translation efficiency concerned only a
very small number of mRNAs at the single-gene level (Fig. 6G).
One interesting finding consisted of the rhythmic regulation of
TISU genes (28, 29). Recently, it was shown that these genes are
protected from AMPK-induced translation inhibition (30), and the
rhythmic activation of the AMPK pathway thus provides an explanation for their rhythmic translation activation (12, 60). TISU
elements are predominantly found in nucleus-encoded mitochondrial protein and their translational properties affect mitochondrial
activity (30). Remarkably, the TORC1 pathway was also shown to
regulate translation of nucleus-encoded mitochondrial genes and
mitochondrial activity (61). Incidentally, mitochondrial oxidative
activity is rhythmic and under the control of the circadian clock
(62–64), and this rhythmic activity is attributed in part to the clockdependent regulation of NAD+ synthesis through the transcriptional regulation of the Nampt gene (65, 66). To what extend the
rhythmic synthesis of mitochondrial proteins modulated by the
circadian clock also contributes to this phenomenon remains to
be demonstrated.
Consequence of Desynchronized Circadian Clock and Feeding Rhythms.
Energy balance is controlled by a complex interaction between metabolic pathways and transcriptional effectors. During
the last decades, many efforts have been made to understand
Atger et al.
PNAS
|
Published online November 9, 2015
|
E6585
SYSTEMS BIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
the transcriptional regulation orchestrated by the circadian clock
and feeding cycles. For example, rhythmicity in gene expression
(11) and in metabolite accumulation (33) can be partially restored
in clock-deficient mice by a restricted feeding regimen. This feeding constraint consolidates rhythmicity in gene expression and
metabolism and can protect against obesity in a high-fat diet
regimen without reducing caloric intake (10, 67). We showed here
that feeding rhythms can also sustain rhythmic posttranscriptional
regulation and mRNA translation of genes coding for proteins
involved in key metabolic pathways, adding a new level of
regulation leading to rhythmic metabolism and physiology.
Feeding–fasting cycles seem to be the main timing cues for the
liver clock, even bypassing the master clock in the brain (68, 69),
which has led to the hypothesis that desynchrony of master and
peripheral clocks under altered feeding conditions disrupts organisms’ homeostasis and predisposes them to chronic diseases. Recent
studies linked growth and associated metabolic pathologies including metabolic syndrome and obesity to desynchronized clocks
(1, 3, 6). Interestingly, many of these pathologies have also been
linked to defects in ribosome biogenesis (70, 71) or mitochondrial
activity (72, 73). Control of ribosome biogenesis and mitochondrial
function by the circadian clock and feeding rhythms could therefore
provide key factors in pathologies associated with circadian disruption. In this way, the concept of chrononutrition, in the sense of
synchronizing feeding rhythms to the circadian clock-imposed
rhythmic metabolism, acquires a mechanistic basis and could lead to
nonpharmacological strategies to prevent metabolic diseases (74).
Materials and Methods
Animal Experiments. All animal studies were conducted in accordance with
Nestlé Animal Study Committee for animal experimentation and the regulations
of the veterinary office of the Canton of Vaud. C57BL/6J mice were purchased
from Charles River Laboratory. Bmal1 KO mice have been previously described
(12). In all experiments, male mice between 10 and 14 wk of age were used. Mice
were maintained under standard animal housing conditions, with free access to
food and water, and in 12-h light/12-h dark cycles. However, for KO mice and
their respective control littermates, animals were fed only at night 4 d before the
organ collection to reduce effects of feeding rhythm. Parts of the collected livers
were subsequently homogenized for the ribosome footprinting, and the rest of
the organs were frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at −80 °C until used for total
RNA and protein extractions.
Ribosome Profiling Method.
Ribosome footprinting. Immediately after the organ collection, livers were
homogenized in lysis buffer containing 20 mM Hepes (pH 7.6), 250 mM NaCl,
10 mM MgCl2, 10 mM DTT, 20 μg/mL cycloheximide, 10 U/μL RNase inhibitor
(New England Biolabs), and a protease inhibitor mixture containing 0.5 mM
PMSF, 10 μg/mL aprotinin, 0.7 μg/mL pepstatin A, and 0.7 μg/mL leupeptin.
The homogenates were centrifuged 10 min at 9,500 × g at 4 °C and supernatants were supplemented with 1 mg/mL heparin, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate,
and 0.5% Triton ×10. Lysates were kept at −80 °C until use. Lysates were supplemented with RNase I (350 U/mg of protein; Invitrogen) and then incubated
1 h at room temperature to generate RNA footprints. Treated lysates were loaded
onto sucrose gradients (7–47% wt/vol) prepared in polysome buffer containing
20 mM Hepes (pH 7.6), 100 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM DTT. After 4.5 h of
centrifugation at 130,000 × g at 4 °C, gradients were fractionated at ∼0.85 mL/min
using a peristaltic pump and fractions corresponding to 40-s intervals were
collected. Optic density at 260 nm of each fraction was measured to establish the monosomal profile in the gradient. Finally, fractions representing the monosomal peak were pooled and RNAs were extracted as
described before (12). Briefly, fractions were precipitated by the addition of
three volumes of ethanol and kept overnight at −80 °C. After 30 min of
centrifugation at 5,200 × g, RNAs were extracted from the nonsoluble
fraction by classic methods (75).
Size selection of RFPs. Footprints were resolved on a 15% TBE Urea Page (Life
Technologies) and gels were stained with SyberGold (Invitrogen). Using dedicated
mRNA markers (76), 26- to 34-nt-long mRNAs fragments were extracted from the
gels through overnight incubation into RNA gel extraction buffer [300 mM sodium acetate (pH 5.5), 1 mM EDTA, and 0.25% (wt/vol) SDS, supplemented with
2 μl of glycogen (Ambion) and 1.5 μL of GlycoBlue (Ambion)]. Footprints were
recovered by overnight precipitation in isopropanol at −80 °C and dissolved in
100 μL of nuclease-free water. Purified RNAs were concentrated using the RNA
Clean and Concentrator 5 kit (Zymo Research) following the recommended
procedure to purify small RNA. The quality and the RNA concentration were
assessed on a Bioanalyzer small RNA chip (Agilent Technologies).
RFP end modifications. Eluted RNA (50–250 ng) was heat-denatured 3 min at
65 °C and chilled on ice. The 3′-terminal cyclophosphate resulting from the
RNase I digestion was removed in a 50-μL reaction with 10 U of T4 PNK (New
England Biolabs) in the absence of ATP. After 60 min of incubation at 37 °C,
ATP was supplemented to a final concentration of 1 mM together with an
addition of 10 U T4 PNK and the reaction was further incubated 60 min at
37 °C. RNAs were purified with the RNA Clean and Concentrator 5 kit (Zymo
Research) and eluted once with 7 μL H2O.
Library generation. Libraries were generated strictly following the Truseq Small
RNA kit recommendations (Illumina). For the purpose of validation, we also
tested the NEXTflex Small RNA Sequencing Kit v2 (Bioo Life Science), which
uses adaptors carrying four random nucleotides at their ligated extremities,
following the manufacturer’s protocol. Note that in both cases we did not
directly perform the PCR amplification after the reverse transcription step
(discussed below). The procedure starts with the whole RNA purified from
the T4 polynucleotide kinase reaction (5 μL starting material, 25 ng to 250 ng
small RNA). Only half of the ligated products was used for the reverse
transcription reaction. The second half was stored at −80 °C as a backup.
Determining the optimal number of PCR cycles. The optimal number of PCR cycles
to be used was determined by a quantitative PCR (qPCR) performed on nonamplified DNA. Briefly, the nonamplified library (before the PCR step) is analyzed
by qPCR using the KAPA Library Quant Kit (Kappa Biosystems), which is normally
used for quantifying libraries following the final PCR amplification. No standard
curve is required but the Cp (crossing point, equivalent to the threshold cycle, or
Ct) obtained is corrected by a cycle correction factor (CCF) that we empirically
determined after fluorimetric quantification of a final test library amplified for a
known number of PCR cycles. As a result, we were able to anticipate the number
of cycle that would yield the desired final concentration of each individual library.
Importantly, the CCF is dependent on the qPCR cycler, qPCR mix, thermocycler in
which the actual PCR amplification will be run. Its value has to be initially determined in the course of a test run but, after that, it can be considered as a
constant for a given library generation protocol. Practically, the reverse transcription reaction is diluted 1/100 and the qPCR reaction assembled with 2 oligos
that we specifically designed for the TruSeq Small RNA kit from Illumina
(CAGAGTTCTACAGTCCGACGAT and TTGGCACCCGAGAATTCCA). The 10-μL reaction was run on a Light Cycler 480 II (Roche) according to the manufacturer’s
recommendations, with 0.3 μM primers. Cycling conditions consisted of an initial
denaturation step of 5 min at 95 °C followed by 40 cycles of 30 s at 95 °C and 45 s
at 45 °C. The obtained Cp was first corrected for the dilution compared with the
real PCR to be performed and then with the abovementioned CCF. In this experiment, we found a CCF value of +3 cycles.
Library amplification. The PCR was designed following Illumina’s recommendation taking advantage of the indexed oligos. The calculated optimal PCR
cycle number was generally homogenous among samples. In series of 48
samples, we typically found around 5 samples that had to be amplified with
a different cycle numbers (± 2 cycles from the average, which is generally
10 cycles). These samples were amplified in a separate reaction.
Library postprocessing. Libraries were purified with Ampure XP beads at a 2×
ratio (cutoff below 100 bp for libraries around 150 bp) and the DNA eluted
with 30 μL resuspension buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 8.0). Libraries were quantified with Picogreen (Life Technology), which usually yields 75– 200 ng DNA,
and size patterns were controlled using a DNA High Sensitivity Reagent kit
on a Caliper GX device (Perkin-Elmer).
Library sequencing. Samples were pooled based on the Illumina indices used
(typically 12–24 samples are pooled together). This 10 nM pool was made equimolar with individual library concentrations calculated from Picogreen data and
an average peak size of 155 bp. Pools were denatured with an equivolume
amount of 100 mM NaOH and neutralized with HT1 buffer (Illumina) to reach a
final concentration of 20 pM. Denatured pools are spiked with 10% PhiX and
loaded onto a single-read flow cell v3 at a concentration of 8 pM strictly following
Illumina’s recommendations. Sequencing was performed on a HiSEq. 2500 (Illumina) for 51 cycles. Optimal sequencing depth typically required loading an
equivalent of 2–10 samples per lane depending on the scope of the experiment.
Total RNA Sequencing. Liver RNAs were extracted as previously described (25)
and libraries were prepared using the TruSeq Stranded Total RNA Sample
Prep Kit with the Ribo-Zero Gold depletion set (Illumina) following the
manufacturer’s protocol. We used 250 ng total RNA as starting material and
performed 11 PCR cycles from library amplification (optimal cycle determined with the same method as the small RNA, discussed above). Samples
were pooled by 24, denatured, spiked with 3% PhiX, and loaded onto a
paired-end read flow cell v3 at a final concentration of 11 pM for a paired-end
E6586
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1515308112
Atger et al.
100 cycles run, strictly following Illumina’s recommendations. Sequencing
depth was equivalent to three samples per lane.
All of the data are deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus database
under accession no. GSE73554.
Data Analysis.
Alignment of ribosome footprints. We used the Ensembl Mus Musculus genome
annotation (assembly GRCm38/mm10) (77). Footprint sequences were first
aligned against rRNA and tRNA sequences (obtained using genome.ucsc.edu/,
filtered on rRNA and tRNA) using STAR 2.3.0 (78) with options -seedSearchStartLmax 15 -clip3pAdapterSeq TGGAATTCTCGGGTGCCAAGGAACTCCAGTCAC -outReadsUnmappedFastx. In this way, the STAR internal clipping function
is used and reads are split into pieces no longer than 15 bp to avoid ambiguous
mapping. Unmapped reads were then aligned with the same options to the
reference genome. To improve accuracy on splice junctions, the index of the
reference genome was built by considering the Ensembl annotation (using STAR
-runMode genomeGenerate -sjdbGTFfile).
Triplet periodicity analysis in ribosome footprints. Using a custom Perl script, 5′ ends
of uniquely mapping reads (up to one mismatch) were analyzed in a window of
50 bp around the annotated translation initiation site and translation end site.
The fraction of reads at every position is computed for each transcript and averaged over all annotated transcripts. This analysis was performed for the 84
samples independently.
Quantification of ribosome footprints. For each Ensembl gene, all of the exons of
the respective annotated protein-coding transcripts were considered. Reads
up to one mismatch, with sizes between 29 and 35 nt, were counted considering only reads in the right orientation. Both uniquely mapping and
multimapping reads were reported. Read counts were normalized by the
respective library size, and by the average size of transcripts coding region.
The resulting ribosome signals (in log2) are provided in Dataset S1.
NEXTFlex analysis. Ribosome profiling reads were trimmed using fastx_clipper from
fastx_toolkit with parameters -Q33 -a TGGAATTCTCGGGTGCCAAGGAACTCCAGTCAC -c -l 11 -M 5. Trimmed reads were filtered for unique sequences. The output
was written in separated fasta files. Both groups of files containing unique sequences or all sequences were aligned independently using the same procedure:
footprint sequences were first aligned against rRNA and tRNA with the options–
seedSearchStartLmax 15–clip5pNbases 4–clip3pNbases 4–outReadsUnmappedFastx.
In this way, the internal trimming function in STAR is used to skip the first and last
four nucleotides (representing the random barcode). Unmapped reads were then
aligned with the same options to the reference genome. For the quantification of
ribosome footprints, our standard pipeline was used.
Mapping of total RNA-Seq. Paired end reads were aligned to the same genome
index than for the RFP using STAR.
Quantification of exonic and intronic levels for each gene. Considering all Ensembl
transcripts annotated to a particular gene, we first defined exonic and intronic
regions. A region was defined as exonic if it occurs in at least one of the transcripts.
Meanwhile, intronic regions had to be shared between all of the transcripts, to
maximize specificity of the intronic read counts. Using a custom Perl script, we
assigned uniquely mapping paired-end reads to exonic regions (in both cases of
exon–exon junctions or read pairs entirely contained in one exon), or intronic
regions (in both cases of intron–exon reads pairs, and ones entirely contained in
one intron), always considering reads orientation. To obtain proxies for the
relative concentrations of exonic and intronic gene products, read counts were
thereafter normalized by the total library sizes, as well as by the total sizes of the
respective intronic or exonic regions. Log2 expression levels were calculated.
5′-TOP analysis. A transcriptional start site sequencing (TSS-Seq) dataset from
embryonic (17 d) mouse was downloaded from DBTSS (version 10) (79). TSS
clusters were filtered for “confident” tag pattern, “NM_correspond” tag
type, and a minimum of 10 tags. The field “Represent TSS position” was used
to define the genomic position of each TSS. For each TSS, we searched in the
region [−5,+20] for a pyrimidine repeat of at least 5 nt starting before the
8th nt from the TSS and with a ratio of [T] and [C] less than 0.8. Enrichment
was performed using a hypergeometric test.
TISU analysis. TSSs are defined as for the 5′-TOP analysis. We scanned, using
fuzznuc (80), the region [−5,+45] around each TSS for the consensus sequence “[CG]AA[CG]ATGGCGG,” allowing one or two mismatches. Enrichment was performed using a hypergeometric test.
Gene ontology analysis. Gene ontology (GO) analysis was performed using
RDAVIDWebService (81). Enrichment test was performed for Biological
Process (BP_all) and KEGG pathway annotation. Categories with adjusted
P values (Benjamini–Hochberg) smaller than 0.05 and a total population count
between 5 and 700 were reported.
Translation efficiency. The ratio between RFP and exonic RNA-Seq expression levels
can be used as a proxy for translation efficiency. To avoid possible bias generated by
our experimental design (single-end RFP reads versus paired-ends RNA-Seq reads),
RNA-Seq sequences were fragmented in silico using a custom Perl script: For each
first read in the pair, a substring with a size sampled from a normal distribution
(mean = 33, SD = 2) was extracted starting at a random position. The resulting
fragmented RNA-Seq (FRS) reads were then aligned and quantified using the same
pipeline as for the ribosome footprints (except for the adapter trimming option).
Changes in translation efficiency between WT and Bmal1 KO conditions were
computed using the edgeR (82) generalized linear model framework. RFP and FRS
counts (unique mapping reads) were normalized using edgeR. To estimate differential translation efficiency in edgeR, conditional (WT, KO) and experimental
(RFP, FRS) factors were introduced together with an interaction term, whose significance is assessed with a likelihood ratio test. Genes with FDR smaller than 0.05
and absolute Log2 fold change larger than 0.5 were analyzed.
Rhythmicity analysis. For ALF (2-h resolution) and RF (4-h resolution) conditions,
we focused on 24 h/12 h and 24 h periodicity, respectively, using harmonic
regression on the log2 transformed signals yðtÞ. We used the relation
yðtÞ = μ + α cosðð2π=TÞ  tÞ +   β  sinðð2π=TÞtÞ + noise, where μ is the mean and α
and β are the coefficients of cosine and sine functions with period T. To
facilitate the comparison of rhythmicity between different types of signals
(RFP or RNA-Seq) and conditions (e.g., genotypes or feeding), we used a
model selection approach. In the case of N conditions, we allowed α and β to
be either zero (no rhythm) or nonzero (rhythms), and, moreover, α and β
could be shared between any subset of the N conditions. In short, a gene
could thus be flat or rhythmic and share its phase and amplitude with any other
conditions. The number of resulting models for N conditions is given by the Bell
number BN+1 (83). Each model is solved using standard linear regression and the
Bayesian information criterion (BIC) is used to control for model complexity (84).
BIC = n  lnðRSS=nÞ +   k  lnðnÞ, with RSS the sum of residuals square of the multilinear regression, n the number of time points, and k the numbers of parameters. Confidence in the models can be addressed using Schwarz weights:
wj =   e
1
2 ΔBICj=P
Me
1
2 ΔBICm
where ΔBICj = BICj −  BICm*, with m* the minimum
BIC value in the set of BN+1 models. wj can be interpreted as the probability
that j is the optimal model (in the BIC sense) given the data and the set of
candidate models.
Total Protein Extraction and Analysis. Frozen livers were homogenized in lysis
buffer containing 20 mM Hepes (pH 7.6), 100 mM KCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM NaF,
1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, 0.15 mM
spermin, 0.5 mM spermidine, 1 mM DTT, and a protease inhibitor mixture. After
incubation 30 min on ice, extracts were centrifuged 10 min at 21,000 × g and the
supernatants were harvested to obtain total extracts. Twenty micrograms of
extract were used for Western blotting. After migration, proteins were transferred to PVDF membranes and Western blotting was realized according to
standard procedures using antibodies (Cell Signaling) raised against P-RPS6
(2211), RPS6 (2117), and P-RAPTOR (2083) proteins.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. This research was supported by Swiss National Science
Foundation Grant 31-130714 (to F.N.), the Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de
Lausanne, European Research Council Starting Grants ERC-2010-StG-260988
(to F.G.) and ERC-2010-StG-260667 (to F.N.), and the Leenaards Foundation (F.G.
and F.N.).
1. Dibner C, Schibler U (2015) Circadian timing of metabolism in animal models and
humans. J Intern Med 277(5):513–527.
2. Gerhart-Hines Z, Lazar MA (2015) Circadian metabolism in the light of evolution.
Endocr Rev 36(3):289–304.
3. Baron KG, Reid KJ (2014) Circadian misalignment and health. Int Rev Psychiatry
26(2):139–154.
4. Vyas MV, et al. (2012) Shift work and vascular events: Systematic review and metaanalysis. BMJ 345:e4800.
5. Crane BR, Young MW (2014) Interactive features of proteins composing eukaryotic
circadian clocks. Annu Rev Biochem 83(1):191–219.
6. Asher G, Sassone-Corsi P (2015) Time for food: The intimate interplay between nutrition, metabolism, and the circadian clock. Cell 161(1):84–92.
7. Koike N, et al. (2012) Transcriptional architecture and chromatin landscape of the
core circadian clock in mammals. Science 338(6105):349–354.
8. Vollmers C, et al. (2012) Circadian oscillations of protein-coding and regulatory RNAs
in a highly dynamic mammalian liver epigenome. Cell Metab 16(6):833–845.
9. Zhang R, Lahens NF, Ballance HI, Hughes ME, Hogenesch JB (2014) A circadian gene
expression atlas in mammals: Implications for biology and medicine. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 111(45):16219–16224.
10. Hatori M, et al. (2012) Time-restricted feeding without reducing caloric intake prevents metabolic diseases in mice fed a high-fat diet. Cell Metab 15(6):
848–860.
11. Vollmers C, et al. (2009) Time of feeding and the intrinsic circadian clock drive
rhythms in hepatic gene expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106(50):21453–21458.
Atger et al.
PNAS
|
Published online November 9, 2015
|
E6587
SYSTEMS BIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
12. Jouffe C, et al. (2013) The circadian clock coordinates ribosome biogenesis. PLoS Biol
11(1):e1001455.
13. Kojima S, Sher-Chen EL, Green CB (2012) Circadian control of mRNA polyadenylation
dynamics regulates rhythmic protein expression. Genes Dev 26(24):2724–2736.
14. Mauvoisin D, et al. (2014) Circadian clock-dependent and -independent rhythmic
proteomes implement distinct diurnal functions in mouse liver. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
111(1):167–172.
15. Ingolia NT (2014) Ribosome profiling: New views of translation, from single codons to
genome scale. Nat Rev Genet 15(3):205–213.
16. Ingolia NT, Ghaemmaghami S, Newman JRS, Weissman JS (2009) Genome-wide
analysis in vivo of translation with nucleotide resolution using ribosome profiling.
Science 324(5924):218–223.
17. Gaidatzis D, Burger L, Florescu M, Stadler MB (2015) Analysis of intronic and exonic
reads in RNA-seq data characterizes transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation. Nat Biotechnol 33(7):722–729.
18. Howard MT, Carlson BA, Anderson CB, Hatfield DL (2013) Translational redefinition of
UGA codons is regulated by selenium availability. J Biol Chem 288(27):19401–19413.
19. O’Connor P, Andreev D, Baranov P (2015) Surveying the relative impact of mRNA
features on local ribosome profiling read density in 28 datasets, dx.doi.org/10.1101/
018762.
20. Gao X, et al. (2015) Quantitative profiling of initiating ribosomes in vivo. Nat Methods
12(2):147–153.
21. Ingolia NT, Lareau LF, Weissman JS (2011) Ribosome profiling of mouse embryonic
stem cells reveals the complexity and dynamics of mammalian proteomes. Cell 147(4):
789–802.
22. Aksenova MV, Aksenov MY, Carney JM, Butterfield DA (1998) Protein oxidation and
enzyme activity decline in old brown Norway rats are reduced by dietary restriction.
Mech Ageing Dev 100(2):157–168.
23. Cui ZJ, Han ZQ, Li ZY (2012) Modulating protein activity and cellular function by
methionine residue oxidation. Amino Acids 43(2):505–517.
24. Floyd RA (1990) Role of oxygen free radicals in carcinogenesis and brain ischemia.
FASEB J 4(9):2587–2597.
25. Gachon F, Olela FF, Schaad O, Descombes P, Schibler U (2006) The circadian PARdomain basic leucine zipper transcription factors DBP, TEF, and HLF modulate basal
and inducible xenobiotic detoxification. Cell Metab 4(1):25–36.
26. Cretenet G, Le Clech M, Gachon F (2010) Circadian clock-coordinated 12 hr period
rhythmic activation of the IRE1alpha pathway controls lipid metabolism in mouse
liver. Cell Metab 11(1):47–57.
27. Hughes ME, et al. (2012) Brain-specific rescue of Clock reveals system-driven transcriptional rhythms in peripheral tissue. PLoS Genet 8(7):e1002835.
28. Elfakess R, Dikstein R (2008) A translation initiation element specific to mRNAs with
very short 5’UTR that also regulates transcription. PLoS One 3(8):e3094.
29. Elfakess R, et al. (2011) Unique translation initiation of mRNAs-containing TISU element. Nucleic Acids Res 39(17):7598–7609.
30. Sinvani H, et al. (2015) Translational tolerance of mitochondrial genes to metabolic
energy stress involves TISU and eIF1-eIF4GI cooperation in start codon selection. Cell
Metab 21(3):479–492.
31. Meyuhas O, Kahan T (2015) The race to decipher the top secrets of TOP mRNAs.
Biochim Biophys Acta 1849(7):801–811.
32. Thoreen CC, et al. (2012) A unifying model for mTORC1-mediated regulation of
mRNA translation. Nature 485(7396):109–113.
33. Adamovich Y, et al. (2014) Circadian clocks and feeding time regulate the oscillations
and levels of hepatic triglycerides. Cell Metab 19(2):319–330.
34. Le Martelot G, et al.; CycliX Consortium (2012) Genome-wide RNA polymerase II
profiles and RNA accumulation reveal kinetics of transcription and associated epigenetic changes during diurnal cycles. PLoS Biol 10(11):e1001442.
35. Menet JS, Rodriguez J, Abruzzi KC, Rosbash M (2012) Nascent-Seq reveals novel
features of mouse circadian transcriptional regulation. eLife 1:e00011.
36. Lück S, Thurley K, Thaben PF, Westermark PO (2014) Rhythmic degradation explains
and unifies circadian transcriptome and proteome data. Cell Reports 9(2):741–751.
37. Brewer M, Lange D, Baler R, Anzulovich A (2005) SREBP-1 as a transcriptional integrator of circadian and nutritional cues in the liver. J Biol Rhythms 20(3):195–205.
38. Gilardi F, et al.; CycliX Consortium (2014) Genome-wide analysis of SREBP1 activity
around the clock reveals its combined dependency on nutrient and circadian signals.
PLoS Genet 10(3):e1004155.
39. Sharova LV, et al. (2009) Database for mRNA half-life of 19 977 genes obtained by
DNA microarray analysis of pluripotent and differentiating mouse embryonic stem
cells. DNA Res 16(1):45–58.
40. Yang E, et al. (2003) Decay rates of human mRNAs: Correlation with functional
characteristics and sequence attributes. Genome Res 13(8):1863–1872.
41. Gachon F, Nagoshi E, Brown SA, Ripperger J, Schibler U (2004) The mammalian circadian
timing system: From gene expression to physiology. Chromosoma 113(3):103–112.
42. Marzluff WF, Duronio RJ (2002) Histone mRNA expression: Multiple levels of cell cycle
regulation and important developmental consequences. Curr Opin Cell Biol 14(6):692–699.
43. Barbiroli B, Potter VR (1971) DNA synthesis and interaction between controlled
feeding schedules and partial hepatectomy in rats. Science 172(3984):738–741.
44. Barnum CP, Jardetzky CD, Halberg F (1958) Time relations among metabolic and
morphologic 24-hour changes in mouse liver. Am J Physiol 195(2):301–310.
45. Miller BH, et al. (2007) Circadian and CLOCK-controlled regulation of the mouse
transcriptome and cell proliferation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104(9):3342–3347.
46. Du N-H, Arpat AB, De Matos M, Gatfield D (2014) MicroRNAs shape circadian hepatic
gene expression on a transcriptome-wide scale. eLife 3:e02510.
47. Fustin J-M, et al. (2013) RNA-methylation-dependent RNA processing controls the
speed of the circadian clock. Cell 155(4):793–806.
48. van der Horst GTJ, et al. (1999) Mammalian Cry1 and Cry2 are essential for maintenance of circadian rhythms. Nature 398(6728):627–630.
49. Cornu M, et al. (2014) Hepatic mTORC1 controls locomotor activity, body temperature, and
lipid metabolism through FGF21. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111(32):11592–11599.
50. Saraf A, Luo J, Morris DR, Storm DR (2014) Phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation
initiation factor 4E and eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E-binding protein
(4EBP) and their upstream signaling components undergo diurnal oscillation in the
mouse hippocampus: Implications for memory persistence. J Biol Chem 289(29):
20129–20138.
51. Cao R, Anderson FE, Jung YJ, Dziema H, Obrietan K (2011) Circadian regulation of
mammalian target of rapamycin signaling in the mouse suprachiasmatic nucleus.
Neuroscience 181(0):79–88.
52. Cao R, et al. (2013) Translational control of entrainment and synchrony of the suprachiasmatic circadian clock by mTOR/4E-BP1 signaling. Neuron 79(4):712–724.
53. Cao R, Li A, Cho HY, Lee B, Obrietan K (2010) Mammalian target of rapamycin signaling modulates photic entrainment of the suprachiasmatic circadian clock. J Neurosci
30(18):6302–6314.
54. Khapre RV, et al. (2014) BMAL1-dependent regulation of the mTOR signaling pathway delays aging. Aging (Albany, NY) 6(1):48–57.
55. Khapre RV, et al. (2014) Metabolic clock generates nutrient anticipation rhythms in
mTOR signaling. Aging (Albany, NY) 6(8):675–689.
56. Woolford JL, Jr, Baserga SJ (2013) Ribosome biogenesis in the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Genetics 195(3):643–681.
57. Lipton JO, et al. (2015) The circadian protein BMAL1 regulates translation in response
to S6K1-mediated phosphorylation. Cell 161(5):1138–1151.
58. Fishman B, Wurtman RJ, Munro HN (1969) Daily rhythms in hepatic polysome profiles
and tyrosine transaminase activity: Role of dietary protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
64(2):677–682.
59. Uchiyama Y, Asari A (1984) A morphometric study of the variations in subcellular
structures of rat hepatocytes during 24 hours. Cell Tissue Res 236(2):305–315.
60. Lamia KA, et al. (2009) AMPK regulates the circadian clock by cryptochrome phosphorylation and degradation. Science 326(5951):437–440.
61. Morita M, et al. (2013) mTORC1 controls mitochondrial activity and biogenesis
through 4E-BP-dependent translational regulation. Cell Metab 18(5):698–711.
62. Masri S, et al. (2013) Circadian acetylome reveals regulation of mitochondrial metabolic pathways. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110(9):3339–3344.
63. Peek CB, et al. (2013) Circadian clock NAD+ cycle drives mitochondrial oxidative metabolism in mice. Science 342(6158):1243417.
64. Kohsaka A, et al. (2014) The circadian clock maintains cardiac function by regulating
mitochondrial metabolism in mice. PLoS One 9(11):e112811.
65. Nakahata Y, Sahar S, Astarita G, Kaluzova M, Sassone-Corsi P (2009) Circadian control
of the NAD+ salvage pathway by CLOCK-SIRT1. Science 324(5927):654–657.
66. Ramsey KM, et al. (2009) Circadian clock feedback cycle through NAMPT-mediated
NAD+ biosynthesis. Science 324(5927):651–654.
67. Chaix A, Zarrinpar A, Miu P, Panda S (2014) Time-restricted feeding is a preventative
and therapeutic intervention against diverse nutritional challenges. Cell Metab 20(6):
991–1005.
68. Damiola F, et al. (2000) Restricted feeding uncouples circadian oscillators in peripheral
tissues from the central pacemaker in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. Genes Dev 14(23):
2950–2961.
69. Stokkan K-A, Yamazaki S, Tei H, Sakaki Y, Menaker M (2001) Entrainment of the
circadian clock in the liver by feeding. Science 291(5503):490–493.
70. Chaillou T, Kirby TJ, McCarthy JJ (2014) Ribosome biogenesis: Emerging evidence for a
central role in the regulation of skeletal muscle mass. J Cell Physiol 229(11):1584–1594.
71. Teng T, Thomas G, Mercer CA (2013) Growth control and ribosomopathies. Curr Opin
Genet Dev 23(1):63–71.
72. Nasrallah CM, Horvath TL (2014) Mitochondrial dynamics in the central regulation of
metabolism. Nat Rev Endocrinol 10(11):650–658.
73. Roy M, Reddy PH, Iijima M, Sesaki H (2015) Mitochondrial division and fusion in
metabolism. Curr Opin Cell Biol 33:111–118.
74. Oike H, Oishi K, Kobori M (2014) Nutrients, clock genes, and chrononutrition. Curr
Nutr Rep 3(3):204–212.
75. Chomczynski P, Sacchi N (1987) Single-step method of RNA isolation by acid guanidinium thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform extraction. Anal Biochem 162(1):156–159.
76. Ingolia NT, Brar GA, Rouskin S, McGeachy AM, Weissman JS (2012) The ribosome
profiling strategy for monitoring translation in vivo by deep sequencing of ribosomeprotected mRNA fragments. Nat Protoc 7(8):1534–1550.
77. Flicek P, et al. (2013) Ensembl 2013. Nucleic Acids Res 41(Database issue, D1):D48–D55.
78. Dobin A, et al. (2013) STAR: Ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 29(1):
15–21.
79. Yamashita R, Sugano S, Suzuki Y, Nakai K (2012) DBTSS: DataBase of Transcriptional Start
Sites progress report in 2012. Nucleic Acids Res 40(Database issue, D1):D150–D154.
80. Rice P, Longden I, Bleasby A (2000) EMBOSS: The European Molecular Biology Open
Software Suite. Trends Genet 16(6):276–277.
81. Jiao X, et al. (2012) DAVID-WS: A stateful web service to facilitate gene/protein list
analysis. Bioinformatics 28(13):1805–1806.
82. Robinson MD, McCarthy DJ, Smyth GK (2010) edgeR: A Bioconductor package for
differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics 26(1):
139–140.
83. Rota G-C (1964) The number of partitions of a set. Am Math Mon 71(5):498–504.
84. Kass RE, Raftery AE (1995) Bayes factors. J Am Stat Assoc 90(430):773–795.
E6588
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1515308112
Atger et al.
