Clinical Infectious Diseases
I D S A G U I D E L I N E
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of
Candidiasis: 2016 Update by the Infectious Diseases
Society of America
Peter G. Pappas,1 Carol A. Kauffman,2 David R. Andes,3 Cornelius J. Clancy,4 Kieren A. Marr,5 Luis Ostrosky-Zeichner,6 Annette C. Reboli,7 Mindy G. Schuster,8
Jose A. Vazquez,9 Thomas J. Walsh,10 Theoklis E. Zaoutis,11 and Jack D. Sobel12
1University of Alabama at Birmingham; 2Veterans Affairs Ann Arbor Healthcare System and University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor; 3University of Wisconsin, Madison; 4University of
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; 5Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; 6University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston; 7Cooper Medical School of Rowan University,
Camden, New Jersey; 8University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia; 9Georgia Regents University, Augusta; 10Weill Cornell Medical Center and Cornell University, New York, New York; 11Children’s
Hospital of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia; and 12Harper University Hospital and Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan
It is important to realize that guidelines cannot always account for individual variation among patients. They are not intended to
supplant physician judgment with respect to particular patients or special clinical situations. IDSA considers adherence to these
guidelines to be voluntary, with the ultimate determination regarding their application to be made by the physician in the light
of each patient’s individual circumstances.
Keywords.
candidemia; invasive candidiasis; fungal diagnostics; azoles; echinocandins.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Background
Invasive infection due to Candida species is largely a condition associated with medical progress, and is widely recognized as a major
cause of morbidity and mortality in the healthcare environment.
There are at least 15 distinct Candida species that cause human disease, but >90% of invasive disease is caused by the 5 most common
pathogens, C. albicans, C. glabrata, C. tropicalis, C. parapsilosis,
and C. krusei. Each of these organisms has unique virulence potential, antifungal susceptibility, and epidemiology, but taken as
a whole, signiﬁcant infections due to these organisms are generally referred to as invasive candidiasis. Mucosal Candida
infections—especially those involving the oropharynx, esophagus, and vagina—are not considered to be classically invasive
disease, but they are included in these guidelines. Since the
last iteration of these guidelines in 2009 [1], there have been
new data pertaining to diagnosis, prevention, and treatment
for proven or suspected invasive candidiasis, leading to signiﬁcant modiﬁcations in our treatment recommendations.
Summarized below are the 2016 revised recommendations
for the management of candidiasis. Due to the guideline’s relevance to pediatrics, the guideline has been reviewed and endorsed by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and
the Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society (PIDS). The Mycoses
Study Group (MSG) has also endorsed these guidelines. The
panel followed a guideline development process that has been
adopted by the Infectious Diseases Society of America
(IDSA), which includes a systematic method of grading both
the quality of evidence (very low, low, moderate, and high)
and the strength of the recommendation (weak or strong) [2]
(Figure 1). [3] The guidelines are not intended to replace clinical judgment in the management of individual patients. A detailed description of the methods, background, and evidence
summaries that support each recommendation can be found
in the full text of the guideline.
I. What Is the Treatment for Candidemia in Nonneutropenic Patients?
Recommendations
1. An echinocandin (caspofungin: loading dose 70 mg, then
50 mg daily; micafungin: 100 mg daily; anidulafungin: loading dose 200 mg, then 100 mg daily) is recommended as initial therapy (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
2. Fluconazole, intravenous or oral, 800-mg (12 mg/kg) loading dose, then 400 mg (6 mg/kg) daily is an acceptable alternative to an echinocandin as initial therapy in selected
patients, including those who are not critically ill and who
are considered unlikely to have a ﬂuconazole-resistant Candida species (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
3. Testing for azole susceptibility is recommended for all bloodstream and other clinically relevant Candida isolates. Testing
for echinocandin susceptibility should be considered in patients who have had prior treatment with an echinocandin
and among those who have infection with C. glabrata or
C. parapsilosis (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Received 28 October 2015; accepted 2 November 2015; published online 16 December 2015.
Correspondence: P. G. Pappas, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Division of Infectious
Disease, 229 Tinsley Harrison Tower, 1900 University Blvd, Birmingham, AL 35294-0006
(pappas@uab.edu).
Clinical Infectious Diseases®
2016;62(4):e1–50
© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society
of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail journals.permissions@oup.com.
DOI: 10.1093/cid/civ933
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Candidiasis • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • e1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
4. Transition from an echinocandin to ﬂuconazole (usually
within 5–7 days) is recommended for patients who are clinically stable, have isolates that are susceptible to ﬂuconazole
(eg, C. albicans), and have negative repeat blood cultures following initiation of antifungal therapy (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
5. For infection due to C. glabrata, transition to higher-dose
ﬂuconazole 800 mg (12 mg/kg) daily or voriconazole 200–
300 (3–4 mg/kg) twice daily should only be considered
among patients with ﬂuconazole-susceptible or voriconazole-susceptible isolates (strong recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
6. Lipid formulation amphotericin B (AmB) (3–5 mg/kg daily)
is a reasonable alternative if there is intolerance, limited
availability, or resistance to other antifungal agents (strong
recommendation; high-quality evidence).
7. Transition from AmB to ﬂuconazole is recommended after
5–7 days among patients who have isolates that are susceptible to ﬂuconazole, who are clinically stable, and in whom
repeat cultures on antifungal therapy are negative (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
8. Among patients with suspected azole- and echinocandinresistant Candida infections, lipid formulation AmB (3–5
mg/kg daily) is recommended (strong recommendation;
low-quality evidence).
9. Voriconazole 400 mg (6 mg/kg) twice daily for 2 doses, then
200 mg (3 mg/kg) twice daily is effective for candidemia, but
offers little advantage over ﬂuconazole as initial therapy
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence). Voriconazole is recommended as step-down oral therapy for selected
cases of candidemia due to C. krusei (strong recommendation;
low-quality evidence).
10. All nonneutropenic patients with candidemia should have
a dilated ophthalmological examination, preferably performed by an ophthalmologist, within the ﬁrst week after
diagnosis (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
11. Follow-up blood cultures should be performed every day
or every other day to establish the time point at which
Figure 1.
Approach and implications to rating the quality of evidence and strength of recommendations using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development
and Evaluation (GRADE) methodology (unrestricted use of the figure granted by the US GRADE Network) [3].
e2 • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • Pappas et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
candidemia has been cleared (strong recommendation; lowquality evidence).
12. Recommended duration of therapy for candidemia without
obvious metastatic complications is for 2 weeks after documented clearance of Candida species from the bloodstream
and resolution of symptoms attributable to candidemia
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
II. Should Central Venous Catheters Be Removed in Nonneutropenic
Patients With Candidemia?
Recommendation
13. Central venous catheters (CVCs) should be removed as
early as possible in the course of candidemia when the source
is presumed to be the CVC and the catheter can be removed
safely; this decision should be individualized for each patient
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
III. What Is the Treatment for Candidemia in Neutropenic Patients?
Recommendations
14. An echinocandin (caspofungin: loading dose 70 mg, then
50 mg daily; micafungin: 100 mg daily; anidulafungin: loading
dose 200 mg, then 100 mg daily) is recommended as initial
therapy (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
15. Lipid formulation AmB, 3–5 mg/kg daily, is an effective
but less attractive alternative because of the potential for
toxicity (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
16. Fluconazole, 800-mg (12 mg/kg) loading dose, then 400
mg (6 mg/kg) daily, is an alternative for patients who are
not critically ill and have had no prior azole exposure
(weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
17. Fluconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg) daily, can be used for stepdown therapy during persistent neutropenia in clinically stable patients who have susceptible isolates and documented
bloodstream clearance (weak recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
18. Voriconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg) twice daily for 2 doses,
then 200–300 mg (3–4 mg/kg) twice daily, can be used in situations in which additional mold coverage is desired (weak
recommendation; low-quality evidence). Voriconazole can
also be used as step-down therapy during neutropenia in
clinically stable patients who have had documented bloodstream clearance and isolates that are susceptible to voriconazole (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
19. For infections due to C. krusei, an echinocandin, lipid
formulation AmB, or voriconazole is recommended (strong
recommendation; low-quality evidence).
20. Recommended minimum duration of therapy for candidemia without metastatic complications is 2 weeks after
documented clearance of Candida from the bloodstream,
provided neutropenia and symptoms attributable to candidemia have resolved (strong recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
21. Ophthalmological ﬁndings of choroidal and vitreal infection are minimal until recovery from neutropenia; therefore,
dilated funduscopic examinations should be performed within the ﬁrst week after recovery from neutropenia (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
22. In the neutropenic patient, sources of candidiasis other
than a CVC (eg, gastrointestinal tract) predominate. Catheter
removal should be considered on an individual basis (strong
recommendation; low-quality evidence).
23. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF)–mobilized
granulocyte transfusions can be considered in cases of persistent candidemia with anticipated protracted neutropenia
(weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
IV. What Is the Treatment for Chronic Disseminated (Hepatosplenic)
Candidiasis?
Recommendations
24. Initial therapy with lipid formulation AmB, 3–5 mg/kg daily
OR an echinocandin (micafungin: 100 mg daily; caspofungin:
70-mg loading dose, then 50 mg daily; or anidulafungin: 200mg loading dose, then 100 mg daily), for several weeks is recommended, followed by oral ﬂuconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg)
daily, for patients who are unlikely to have a ﬂuconazoleresistant isolate (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
25. Therapy should continue until lesions resolve on repeat
imaging, which is usually several months. Premature discontinuation of antifungal therapy can lead to relapse (strong
recommendation; low-quality evidence).
26. If chemotherapy or hematopoietic cell transplantation is
required, it should not be delayed because of the presence of
chronic disseminated candidiasis, and antifungal therapy
should be continued throughout the period of high risk to prevent relapse (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
27. For patients who have debilitating persistent fevers,
short-term (1–2 weeks) treatment with nonsteroidal antiinﬂammatory drugs or corticosteroids can be considered
(weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
V. What Is the Role of Empiric Treatment for Suspected Invasive
Candidiasis in Nonneutropenic Patients in the Intensive Care Unit?
Recommendations
28. Empiric antifungal therapy should be considered in critically
ill patients with risk factors for invasive candidiasis and no
other known cause of fever and should be based on clinical
assessment of risk factors, surrogate markers for invasive candidiasis, and/or culture data from nonsterile sites (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence). Empiric antifungal
therapy should be started as soon as possible in patients who
have the above risk factors and who have clinical signs of septic shock (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
29. Preferred empiric therapy for suspected candidiasis in
nonneutropenic patients in the intensive care unit (ICU) is
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Candidiasis • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • e3
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
an echinocandin (caspofungin: loading dose of 70 mg, then
50 mg daily; micafungin: 100 mg daily; anidulafungin: loading dose of 200 mg, then 100 mg daily) (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
30. Fluconazole, 800-mg (12 mg/kg) loading dose, then 400
mg (6 mg/kg) daily, is an acceptable alternative for patients
who have had no recent azole exposure and are not colonized
with azole-resistant Candida species (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
31. Lipid formulation AmB, 3–5 mg/kg daily, is an alternative
if there is intolerance to other antifungal agents (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
32. Recommended duration of empiric therapy for suspected
invasive candidiasis in those patients who improve is 2
weeks, the same as for treatment of documented candidemia
(weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
33. For patients who have no clinical response to empiric antifungal therapy at 4–5 days and who do not have subsequent
evidence of invasive candidiasis after the start of empiric
therapy or have a negative non-culture-based diagnostic
assay with a high negative predictive value, consideration
should be given to stopping antifungal therapy (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
VI. Should Prophylaxis Be Used to Prevent Invasive Candidiasis in the
Intensive Care Unit Setting?
Recommendations
34. Fluconazole, 800-mg (12 mg/kg) loading dose, then 400
mg (6 mg/kg) daily, could be used in high-risk patients in
adult ICUs with a high rate (>5%) of invasive candidiasis
(weak recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
35. An alternative is to give an echinocandin (caspofungin:
70-mg loading dose, then 50 mg daily; anidulafungin:
200-mg loading dose and then 100 mg daily; or micafungin: 100 mg daily) (weak recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
36. Daily bathing of ICU patients with chlorhexidine, which
has been shown to decrease the incidence of bloodstream infections including candidemia, could be considered (weak
recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
VII. What Is the Treatment for Neonatal Candidiasis, Including Central
Nervous System Infection?
What Is the Treatment for Invasive Candidiasis and Candidemia?
Recommendations
37. AmB deoxycholate, 1 mg/kg daily, is recommended for
neonates with disseminated candidiasis (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
38. Fluconazole, 12 mg/kg intravenous or oral daily, is a reasonable alternative in patients who have not been on ﬂuconazole prophylaxis (strong recommendation; moderate-quality
evidence).
39. Lipid formulation AmB, 3–5 mg/kg daily, is an alternative,
but should be used with caution, particularly in the presence
of urinary tract involvement (weak recommendation; lowquality evidence).
40. Echinocandins should be used with caution and generally
limited to salvage therapy or to situations in which resistance
or toxicity preclude the use of AmB deoxycholate or ﬂuconazole (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
41. A lumbar puncture and a dilated retinal examination are
recommended in neonates with cultures positive for Candida
species from blood and/or urine (strong recommendation;
low-quality evidence).
42. Computed tomographic or ultrasound imaging of the genitourinary tract, liver, and spleen should be performed
if blood cultures are persistently positive for Candida species
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
43. CVC removal is strongly recommended (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
44. The recommended duration of therapy for candidemia
without obvious metastatic complications is for 2 weeks
after documented clearance of Candida species from the
bloodstream and resolution of signs attributable to candidemia (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
What Is the Treatment for Central Nervous System Infections in
Neonates?
Recommendations
45. For initial treatment, AmB deoxycholate, 1 mg/kg intravenous daily, is recommended (strong recommendation; lowquality evidence).
46. An alternative regimen is liposomal AmB, 5 mg/kg daily
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
47. The addition of ﬂucytosine, 25 mg/kg 4 times daily, may be
considered as salvage therapy in patients who have not had a
clinical response to initial AmB therapy, but adverse effects
are frequent (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
48. For step-down treatment after the patient has responded to
initial treatment, ﬂuconazole, 12 mg/kg daily, is recommended for isolates that are susceptible to ﬂuconazole (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
49. Therapy should continue until all signs, symptoms, and cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) and radiological abnormalities, if present,
have resolved (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
50. Infected central nervous system (CNS) devices, including
ventriculostomy drains and shunts, should be removed if at
all possible (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
What Are the Recommendations for Prophylaxis in the Neonatal
Intensive Care Unit Setting?
Recommendations
51. In nurseries with high rates (>10%) of invasive candidiasis,
intravenous or oral ﬂuconazole prophylaxis, 3–6 mg/kg twice
e4 • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • Pappas et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
weekly for 6 weeks, in neonates with birth weights <1000 g is
recommended (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
52. Oral nystatin, 100 000 units 3 times daily for 6 weeks, is an
alternative to ﬂuconazole in neonates with birth weights
<1500 g in situations in which availability or resistance
preclude the use of ﬂuconazole (weak recommendation;
moderate-quality evidence).
53. Oral bovine lactoferrin (100 mg/day) may be effective in
neonates <1500 g but is not currently available in US hospitals (weak recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
VIII. What Is the Treatment for Intra-abdominal Candidiasis?
Recommendations
54. Empiric antifungal therapy should be considered for patients with clinical evidence of intra-abdominal infection
and signiﬁcant risk factors for candidiasis, including recent
abdominal surgery, anastomotic leaks, or necrotizing pancreatitis (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
55. Treatment of intra-abdominal candidiasis should include
source control, with appropriate drainage and/or debridement (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
56. The choice of antifungal therapy is the same as for the
treatment of candidemia or empiric therapy for nonneutropenic patients in the ICU (See sections I and V) (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
57. The duration of therapy should be determined by adequacy
of source control and clinical response (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
IX. Does the Isolation of Candida Species From the Respiratory Tract
Require Antifungal Therapy?
Recommendation
58. Growth of Candida from respiratory secretions usually indicates colonization and rarely requires treatment with antifungal
therapy (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
X. What Is the Treatment for Candida Intravascular Infections, Including
Endocarditis and Infections of Implantable Cardiac Devices?
What Is the Treatment for Candida Endocarditis?
Recommendations
59. For native valve endocarditis, lipid formulation AmB, 3–5
mg/kg daily, with or without ﬂucytosine, 25 mg/kg 4 times
daily, OR high-dose echinocandin (caspofungin 150 mg
daily, micafungin 150 mg daily, or anidulafungin 200 mg
daily) is recommended for initial therapy (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
60. Step-down therapy to ﬂuconazole, 400–800 mg (6–12 mg/
kg) daily, is recommended for patients who have susceptible
Candida isolates, have demonstrated clinical stability, and
have cleared Candida from the bloodstream (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
61. Oral voriconazole, 200–300 mg (3–4 mg/kg) twice daily, or
posaconazole tablets, 300 mg daily, can be used as step-down
therapy for isolates that are susceptible to those agents but
not susceptible to ﬂuconazole (weak recommendation; very
low-quality evidence).
62. Valve replacement is recommended; treatment should continue for at least 6 weeks after surgery and for a longer duration
in patients with perivalvular abscesses and other complications
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
63. For patients who cannot undergo valve replacement, longterm suppression with ﬂuconazole, 400–800 mg (6–12 mg/
kg) daily, if the isolate is susceptible, is recommended (strong
recommendation; low-quality evidence).
64. For prosthetic valve endocarditis, the same antifungal regimens suggested for native valve endocarditis are recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Chronic suppressive antifungal therapy with ﬂuconazole,
400–800 mg (6–12 mg/kg) daily, is recommended to prevent recurrence (strong recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
What Is the Treatment for Candida Infection of Implantable
Cardiac Devices?
Recommendations
65. For pacemaker and implantable cardiac deﬁbrillator infections, the entire device should be removed (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
66. Antifungal therapy is the same as that recommended for
native valve endocarditis (strong recommendation; lowquality evidence).
67. For infections limited to generator pockets, 4 weeks of antifungal therapy after removal of the device is recommended
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
68. For infections involving the wires, at least 6 weeks of antifungal therapy after wire removal is recommended (strong
recommendation; low-quality evidence).
69. For ventricular assist devices that cannot be removed, the antifungal regimen is the same as that recommended for native
valve endocarditis (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence). Chronic suppressive therapy with ﬂuconazole if the isolate is susceptible, for as long as the device remains in place is
recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
What Is the Treatment for Candida Suppurative Thrombophlebitis?
Recommendations
70. Catheter removal and incision and drainage or resection of
the vein, if feasible, is recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
71. Lipid formulation AmB, 3–5 mg/kg daily, OR ﬂuconazole,
400–800 mg (6–12 mg/kg) daily, OR an echinocandin (caspofungin 150 mg daily, micafungin 150 mg daily, or anidulafungin 200 mg daily) for at least 2 weeks after candidemia
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Candidiasis • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • e5
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
(if present) has cleared is recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
72. Step-down therapy to ﬂuconazole, 400–800 mg (6–12 mg/
kg) daily, should be considered for patients who have initially
responded to AmB or an echinocandin, are clinically stable,
and have a ﬂuconazole-susceptible isolate (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
73. Resolution of the thrombus can be used as evidence to discontinue antifungal therapy if clinical and culture data are
supportive (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
XI. What Is the Treatment for Candida Osteoarticular Infections?
What Is the Treatment for Candida Osteomyelitis?
Recommendations
74. Fluconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg) daily, for 6–12 months OR
an echinocandin (caspofungin 50–70 mg daily, micafungin
100 mg daily, or anidulafungin 100 mg daily) for at least 2
weeks followed by ﬂuconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg) daily, for
6–12 months is recommended (strong recommendation;
low-quality evidence).
75. Lipid formulation AmB, 3–5 mg/kg daily, for at least 2
weeks followed by ﬂuconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg) daily, for
6–12 months is a less attractive alternative (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
76. Surgical debridement is recommended in selected cases
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
What Is the Treatment for Candida Septic Arthritis?
77. Fluconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg) daily, for 6 weeks OR an
echinocandin (caspofungin 50–70 mg daily, micafungin 100
mg daily, or anidulafungin 100 mg daily) for 2 weeks followed
by ﬂuconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg) daily, for at least 4 weeks is
recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
78. Lipid formulation AmB, 3–5 mg/kg daily, for 2 weeks, followed by ﬂuconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg) daily, for at least 4
weeks is a less attractive alternative (weak recommendation;
low-quality evidence).
79. Surgical drainage is indicated in all cases of septic arthritis
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
80. For septic arthritis involving a prosthetic device, device removal is recommended (strong recommendation; moderatequality evidence).
81. If the prosthetic device cannot be removed, chronic suppression with ﬂuconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg) daily, if the isolate is susceptible, is recommended (strong recommendation;
low-quality evidence).
XII. What Is the Treatment for Candida Endophthalmitis?
What Is the General Approach to Candida Endophthalmitis?
Recommendations
82. All patients with candidemia should have a dilated retinal
examination, preferably performed by an ophthalmologist,
within the ﬁrst week of therapy in nonneutropenic patients
to establish if endophthalmitis is present (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence). For neutropenic patients, it is
recommended to delay the examination until neutrophil recovery (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
83. The extent of ocular infection (chorioretinitis with or without macular involvement and with or without vitritis) should
be determined by an ophthalmologist (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
84. Decisions regarding antifungal treatment and surgical intervention should be made jointly by an ophthalmologist and
an infectious diseases physician (strong recommendation;
low-quality evidence).
What Is the Treatment for Candida Chorioretinitis Without
Vitritis?
Recommendations
85. For ﬂuconazole-/voriconazole-susceptible isolates, ﬂuconazole, loading dose, 800 mg (12 mg/kg), then 400–800
mg (6–12 mg/kg) daily OR voriconazole, loading dose 400
mg (6 mg/kg) intravenous twice daily for 2 doses, then
300 mg (4 mg/kg) intravenous or oral twice daily is recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
86. For ﬂuconazole-/voriconazole-resistant isolates, liposomal
AmB, 3–5 mg/kg intravenous daily, with or without oral ﬂucytosine, 25 mg/kg 4 times daily is recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
87. With macular involvement, antifungal agents as noted
above PLUS intravitreal injection of either AmB deoxycholate, 5–10 µg/0.1 mL sterile water, or voriconazole, 100 µg/
0.1 mL sterile water or normal saline, to ensure a prompt
high level of antifungal activity is recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
88. The duration of treatment should be at least 4–6 weeks,
with the ﬁnal duration depending on resolution of the lesions
as determined by repeated ophthalmological examinations
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
What Is the Treatment for Candida Chorioretinitis With Vitritis?
Recommendations
89. Antifungal therapy as detailed above for chorioretinitis
without vitritis, PLUS intravitreal injection of either amphotericin B deoxycholate, 5–10 µg/0.1 mL sterile water, or
voriconazole, 100 µg/0.1 mL sterile water or normal saline
is recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
90. Vitrectomy should be considered to decrease the burden of
organisms and to allow the removal of fungal abscesses that
are inaccessible to systemic antifungal agents (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
91. The duration of treatment should be at least 4–6 weeks,
with the ﬁnal duration dependent on resolution of the lesions
e6 • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • Pappas et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
as determined by repeated ophthalmological examinations
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
XIII. What Is the Treatment for Central Nervous System Candidiasis?
Recommendations
92. For initial treatment, liposomal AmB, 5 mg/kg daily, with
or without oral ﬂucytosine, 25 mg/kg 4 times daily is recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
93. For step-down therapy after the patient has responded to initial treatment, ﬂuconazole, 400–800 mg (6–12 mg/kg) daily, is
recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
94. Therapy should continue until all signs and symptoms and
CSF and radiological abnormalities have resolved (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
95. Infected CNS devices, including ventriculostomy drains,
shunts, stimulators, prosthetic reconstructive devices, and biopolymer wafers that deliver chemotherapy should be removed
if possible (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
96. For patients in whom a ventricular device cannot be removed, AmB deoxycholate could be administered through
the device into the ventricle at a dosage ranging from 0.01
mg to 0.5 mg in 2 mL 5% dextrose in water (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
XIV. What Is the Treatment for Urinary Tract Infections Due to Candida
Species?
What Is the Treatment for Asymptomatic Candiduria?
Recommendations
97. Elimination of predisposing factors, such as indwelling
bladder catheters, is recommended whenever feasible (strong
recommendation; low-quality evidence).
98. Treatment with antifungal agents is NOT recommended
unless the patient belongs to a group at high risk for dissemination; high-risk patients include neutropenic patients, very
low-birth-weight infants (<1500 g), and patients who will
undergo urologic manipulation (strong recommendation;
low-quality evidence).
99. Neutropenic patients and very low–birth-weight infants
should be treated as recommended for candidemia (see sections
III and VII) (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
100. Patients undergoing urologic procedures should be treated
with oral ﬂuconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg) daily, OR AmB deoxycholate, 0.3–0.6 mg/kg daily, for several days before and after
the procedure (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
What Is the Treatment for Symptomatic Candida Cystitis?
Recommendations
101. For ﬂuconazole-susceptible organisms, oral ﬂuconazole,
200 mg (3 mg/kg) daily for 2 weeks is recommended (strong
recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
102. For ﬂuconazole-resistant C. glabrata, AmB deoxycholate,
0.3–0.6 mg/kg daily for 1–7 days OR oral ﬂucytosine, 25 mg/
kg 4 times daily for 7–10 days is recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
103. For C. krusei, AmB deoxycholate, 0.3–0.6 mg/kg daily, for
1–7 days is recommended (strong recommendation; lowquality evidence).
104. Removal of an indwelling bladder catheter, if feasible, is
strongly recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
105. AmB deoxycholate bladder irrigation, 50 mg/L sterile
water daily for 5 days, may be useful for treatment of cystitis
due to ﬂuconazole-resistant species, such as C. glabrata and
C. krusei (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
What Is the Treatment for Symptomatic Ascending Candida
Pyelonephritis?
Recommendations
106. For ﬂuconazole-susceptible organisms, oral ﬂuconazole,
200–400 mg (3–6 mg/kg) daily for 2 weeks is recommended
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
107. For ﬂuconazole-resistant C. glabrata, AmB deoxycholate,
0.3–0.6 mg/kg daily for 1–7 days with or without oral ﬂucytosine, 25 mg/kg 4 times daily, is recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
108. For ﬂuconazole-resistant C. glabrata, monotherapy with
oral ﬂucytosine, 25 mg/kg 4 times daily for 2 weeks, could
be considered (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
109. For C. krusei, AmB deoxycholate, 0.3–0.6 mg/kg daily, for
1–7 days is recommended (strong recommendation; lowquality evidence).
110. Elimination of urinary tract obstruction is strongly recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
111. For patients who have nephrostomy tubes or stents in
place, consider removal or replacement, if feasible (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
What Is the Treatment for Candida Urinary Tract Infection Associated With Fungus Balls?
Recommendations
112. Surgical intervention is strongly recommended in adults
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
113. Antifungal treatment as noted above for cystitis or pyelonephritis is recommended (strong recommendation; lowquality evidence).
114. Irrigation through nephrostomy tubes, if present, with
AmB deoxycholate, 25–50 mg in 200–500 mL sterile water,
is recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
XV. What Is the Treatment for Vulvovaginal Candidiasis?
Recommendations
115. For the treatment of uncomplicated Candida vulvovaginitis, topical antifungal agents, with no one agent superior to
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Candidiasis • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • e7
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
another, are recommended (strong recommendation; highquality evidence).
116. Alternatively, for the treatment of uncomplicated Candida vulvovaginitis, a single 150-mg oral dose of ﬂuconazole
is recommended (strong recommendation; high-quality
evidence).
117. For severe acute Candida vulvovaginitis, ﬂuconazole, 150
mg, given every 72 hours for a total of 2 or 3 doses, is recommended (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
118. For C. glabrata vulvovaginitis that is unresponsive to oral
azoles, topical intravaginal boric acid, administered in a gelatin capsule, 600 mg daily, for 14 days is an alternative
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
119. Another alternative agent for C. glabrata infection is nystatin intravaginal suppositories, 100 000 units daily for 14
days (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
120. A third option for C. glabrata infection is topical 17% ﬂucytosine cream alone or in combination with 3% AmB cream
administered daily for 14 days (weak recommendation; lowquality evidence).
121. For recurring vulvovaginal candidiasis, 10–14 days of
induction therapy with a topical agent or oral ﬂuconazole,
followed by ﬂuconazole, 150 mg weekly for 6 months, is recommended (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
XVI. What Is the Treatment for Oropharyngeal Candidiasis?
Recommendations
122. For mild disease, clotrimazole troches, 10 mg 5 times
daily, OR miconazole mucoadhesive buccal 50-mg tablet applied to the mucosal surface over the canine fossa once daily
for 7–14 days are recommended (strong recommendation;
high-quality evidence).
123. Alternatives for mild disease include nystatin suspension
(100 000 U/mL) 4–6 mL 4 times daily, OR 1–2 nystatin pastilles (200 000 U each) 4 times daily, for 7–14 days (strong
recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
124. For moderate to severe disease, oral ﬂuconazole, 100–200
mg daily, for 7–14 days is recommended (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
125. For ﬂuconazole-refractory disease, itraconazole solution,
200 mg once daily OR posaconazole suspension, 400 mg
twice daily for 3 days then 400 mg daily, for up to 28 days
are recommended (strong recommendation; moderate-quality
evidence).
126. Alternatives for ﬂuconazole-refractory disease include
voriconazole, 200 mg twice daily, OR AmB deoxycholate
oral suspension, 100 mg/mL 4 times daily (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
127. Intravenous echinocandin (caspofungin: 70-mg loading
dose, then 50 mg daily; micafungin: 100 mg daily; or anidulafungin: 200-mg loading dose, then 100 mg daily) OR intravenous AmB deoxycholate, 0.3 mg/kg daily, are other
alternatives for refractory disease (weak recommendation;
moderate-quality evidence).
128. Chronic suppressive therapy is usually unnecessary. If required for patients who have recurrent infection, ﬂuconazole,
100 mg 3 times weekly, is recommended (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
129. For HIV-infected patients, antiretroviral therapy is
strongly recommended to reduce the incidence of recurrent
infections (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
130. For denture-related candidiasis, disinfection of the denture, in addition to antifungal therapy is recommended
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
XVII. What Is the Treatment for Esophageal Candidiasis?
Recommendations
131. Systemic antifungal therapy is always required. A diagnostic trial of antifungal therapy is appropriate before
performing an endoscopic examination (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
132. Oral ﬂuconazole, 200–400 mg (3–6 mg/kg) daily, for 14–
21 days is recommended (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
133. For patients who cannot tolerate oral therapy, intravenous
ﬂuconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg) daily, OR an echinocandin
(micafungin, 150 mg daily, caspofungin, 70-mg loading
dose, then 50 mg daily, or anidulafungin, 200 mg daily) is recommended (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
134. A less preferred alternative for those who cannot tolerate
oral therapy is AmB deoxycholate, 0.3–0.7 mg/kg daily
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
135. Consider de-escalating to oral therapy with ﬂuconazole
200–400 mg (3–6 mg/kg) daily once the patient is able to tolerate oral intake (strong recommendation; moderate-quality
evidence).
136. For ﬂuconazole-refractory disease, itraconazole solution,
200 mg daily, OR voriconazole, 200 mg (3 mg/kg) twice
daily either intravenous or oral, for 14–21 days is recommended (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
137. Alternatives for ﬂuconazole-refractory disease include an
echinocandin (micafungin: 150 mg daily; caspofungin: 70mg loading dose, then 50 mg daily; or anidulafungin: 200
mg daily) for 14–21 days, OR AmB deoxycholate, 0.3–0.7
mg/kg daily, for 21 days (strong recommendation; highquality evidence).
138. Posaconazole suspension, 400 mg twice daily, or extended-release tablets, 300 mg once daily, could be considered for
ﬂuconazole-refractory disease (weak recommendation; lowquality evidence).
139. For patients who have recurrent esophagitis, chronic suppressive therapy with ﬂuconazole, 100–200 mg 3 times weekly, is recommended (strong recommendation; high-quality
evidence).
e8 • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • Pappas et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
140. For HIV-infected patients, antiretroviral therapy is
strongly recommended to reduce the incidence of recurrent
infections (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
INTRODUCTION
In the ﬁrst section, the panel summarizes background information relevant to the topic. In the second section, the panel poses
questions regarding the management of candidiasis, evaluates
applicable clinical trial and observational data, and makes recommendations using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) framework [2].
The following 17 questions were answered:
I. What is the treatment for candidemia in nonneutropenic
patients?
II. Should central venous catheters be removed in nonneutropenic patients with candidemia?
III. What is the treatment for candidemia in neutropenic
patients?
IV. What is the treatment for chronic disseminated (hepatosplenic) candidiasis?
V. What is the role of empiric treatment for suspected invasive
candidiasis in nonneutropenic patients in the intensive care
unit?
VI. Should prophylaxis be used to prevent invasive candidiasis
in the intensive care unit setting?
VII. What is the treatment for neonatal candidiasis, including
central nervous system infection?
VIII. What is the treatment for intra-abdominal candidiasis?
IX. Does the isolation of Candida species from the respiratory
tract require antifungal therapy?
X. What is the treatment for Candida intravascular infections,
including endocarditis and infections of implantable cardiac
devices?
XI. What is the treatment for Candida osteoarticular
infections?
XII. What is the treatment for Candida endophthalmitis?
XIII. What is the treatment for central nervous system
candidiasis?
XIV. What is the treatment for urinary tract infections due to
Candida species?
XV. What is the treatment for vulvovaginal candidiasis?
XVI. What is the treatment for oropharyngeal candidiasis?
XVII. What is the treatment for esophageal candidiasis?
Infections due to Candida species are major causes of morbidity and mortality in humans, causing a diverse spectrum of
clinical disease ranging from superﬁcial and mucosal infections
to invasive disease associated with candidemia and metastatic
organ involvement. As an entity, candidemia is one of the
most common healthcare-associated bloodstream infections in
US hospitals, typically ranking as the third or fourth most
common cause of healthcare–associated bloodstream infection.
A recent multicenter point-prevalence survey identiﬁed Candida species as the most commonly isolated healthcare-associated
bloodstream pathogen [4]. Among patients with candidemia
and other forms of invasive candidiasis, non-albicans Candida
species constitute approximately 50% of all relevant isolates,
representing a steady trend in many regions throughout the
world for more than a decade [5–12].
Among the many clinical manifestations of candidiasis, candidemia and invasive candidiasis have been given the most
attention in clinical trials. Candidemia is associated with up
to 47% attributable mortality [5–13], and this is even higher
among persons with septic shock [14]. Several authors have
demonstrated that mortality is closely linked to both timing
of therapy and/or source control [14–19]. That is, earlier intervention with appropriate antifungal therapy and removal of a
contaminated central venous catheter (CVC) or drainage of infected material is generally associated with better overall outcomes [14–19]. CVCs are commonly linked with candidemia,
but catheters are not always the source, especially among
neutropenic patients in whom the gastrointestinal tract is a
common source. Most experts agree that thoughtful patientspeciﬁc management of CVCs is critical in the overall management of the infection [19].
The continued reliance on blood cultures, which are notoriously insensitive as markers of disease, remains a signiﬁcant obstacle to early intervention for this condition. The development
of reliable nonculture assays is critical to providing the opportunity for earlier intervention and more targeted antifungal
therapy among large numbers of patients in whom traditional
blood cultures are insensitive or provide untimely results [20].
Species distribution is also a signiﬁcant challenge for all
forms of candidiasis, and there is considerable geographic, center-to-center, and even unit-to-unit variability in the prevalence
of pathogenic Candida species [8–12].Indeed, candidiasis is not
one but rather several diseases, with each Candida species presenting its own unique characteristics with respect to tissue tropism, propensity to cause invasive disease, virulence, and
antifungal susceptibility. A working knowledge of the local epidemiology and rates of antifungal resistance is critical in making informed therapeutic decisions while awaiting culture and
susceptibility data.
Despite the overall robust nature of the randomized controlled trials examining treatment of candidemia and other
forms of invasive candidiasis [21–34], no single trial has demonstrated clear superiority of one therapeutic agent over another. Careful analysis of these clinical data sometimes leads to
conﬂicting conclusions. For instance, the use of amphotericin
B (AmB) plus ﬂuconazole is as least as effective as higherdose (800 mg daily) ﬂuconazole given alone for patients with
candidemia [22], but there is little role for this combination
in current practice, especially as echinocandins are such a safe
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Candidiasis • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • e9
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
and effective alternative. Similarly, voriconazole is as effective as
the strategy of sequential AmB and ﬂuconazole for candidemia,
but few would choose voriconazole in this setting as there is little advantage and potentially greater toxicity associated with
using this agent compared to other therapies [23].
The echinocandins have emerged as preferred agents for
most episodes of candidemia and invasive candidiasis, with
the exception of central nervous system (CNS), eye, and urinary
tract infections due to these organisms. This preference is based
on a strong safety proﬁle, convenience, early fungicidal activity,
a trend toward better outcomes based on data from individual
studies and combined analyses of candidemia studies [19, 25],
and the emergence of azole-resistant Candida species. The recent emergence of multidrug-resistant Candida species further
complicates the selection of antifungal therapy for the immediate future [10, 12, 35–38] as there are no good prospective data
to guide therapy.
There is an abundance of clinical data generated from large
randomized clinical trials for candidemia, Candida esophagitis,
oropharyngeal candidiasis, and prophylaxis studies in special
populations, such as patients in intensive care units (ICUs), neonates, and selected transplant recipients, and these studies
have led to important insights into optimal therapeutic approaches in these vulnerable populations. For those with less
common manifestations of disease, such as osteomyelitis,
endophthalmitis, and infective endocarditis, treatment recommendations are largely based on extrapolation from randomized studies of patients with other forms of disease, small
retrospective series, and anecdotal reports. Thus, there is a critical need to assess these data in an ongoing manner to provide
timely recommendations pertaining to the management of patients with these less common forms of candidiasis.
METHODS
Panel Composition
The most recent version of the Infectious Diseases Society of
America (IDSA) guideline on the management of patients with
candidiasis was published in 2009 [1]. For this update, the IDSA
Standards and Practice Guidelines Committee (SPGC) convened a multidisciplinary panel of 12 experts in the management of patients with candidiasis. The panel consisted of 12
members of IDSA, and included 11 adult infectious diseases
physicians and 1 pediatric infectious diseases physician. All
panel members were selected on the basis of their expertise in
clinical and/or laboratory mycology with a focus on candidiasis.
Literature Review and Analysis
Panel members were each assigned to review the recent literature for at least 1 topic, evaluate the evidence, determine the
strength of recommendations, and develop written evidence
in support of these recommendations. PubMed, which includes
Medline (1946 to present), was searched to identify relevant
studies for the Candida guideline PICO (population/patient, intervention/indicator, comparator/control, outcome) questions.
Search strategies were developed and built by 2 independent
health sciences librarians from the Health Sciences Library System, University of Pittsburgh. For each PICO question, the librarians developed the search strategies using PubMed’s
command language and appropriate search ﬁelds. Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms and keywords were used for the
main search concepts of each PICO question. Articles in all languages and all publication years were included. Initial searches
were created and conﬁrmed with input from the guideline committee chairs and group leaders from August to November
2013. The searches were ﬁnalized and delivered between late
November 2013 and January 2014. After the literature searches
were performed, authors continued to review the literature and
added relevant articles as needed.
Process Overview
The panel met face-to-face twice and conducted a series of conference calls over a 2-year period. The panel reviewed and discussed all recommendations, their strength, and the quality of
evidence. Discrepancies were discussed and resolved, and all
ﬁnal recommendations represent a consensus opinion of the entire panel. For the ﬁnal version of these guidelines, the panel as a
group reviewed all individual sections.
Evidence Review: The GRADE Method
GRADE is a systematic approach to guideline development that
has been described in detail elsewhere [2, 39]. The IDSA adopted GRADE in 2008. In the GRADE system, the guideline panel
assigns each recommendation with separate ratings for the underlying quality of evidence supporting the recommendation
and for the strength with which the recommendation is made
(Figure 1). Data from randomized controlled trials begin as
“high” quality, and data from observational studies begin as
“low” quality. However, the panel may judge that speciﬁc features of the data warrant decreasing or increasing the quality
of evidence rating, and GRADE provides guidance on how
such factors should be weighed [39]. The strength assigned to
a recommendation chieﬂy reﬂects the panel’s conﬁdence that
the beneﬁts of following the recommendation are likely to outweigh potential harms. While the quality of evidence is an important factor in choosing recommendation strength, it is not
prescriptive.
Guidelines and Conﬂicts of Interest
The expert panel complied with the IDSA policy on conﬂicts of
interest, which requires disclosure of any ﬁnancial or other interest that may be construed as constituting an actual, potential, or
apparent conﬂict. Panel members were provided IDSA’s conﬂicts
of interest disclosure statement and were asked to identify ties to
companies developing products that may be affected by promulgation of the guideline. Information was requested regarding employment, consultancies, stock ownership, honoraria, research
e10 • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • Pappas et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
funding, expert testimony, and membership on company advisory committees. Decisions were made on a case-by-case basis
as to whether an individual’s role should be limited as a result
of a conﬂict. Potential conﬂicts of interests are listed in the
Acknowledgments section.
Consensus Development Based on Evidence
The panel obtained feedback from 3 external peer reviewers.
The guidelines were reviewed and endorsed by the MSG, the
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society (PIDS). The guideline was reviewed
and approved by the IDSA SPGC and the IDSA Board of Directors prior to dissemination.
Revision Dates
At annual intervals, the panel chairs will be asked for their input
on the need to update the guideline based on an examination of
the current literature. The IDSA SPGC will consider this input
and determine the necessity and timing of an update. If warranted, the entire panel or a subset thereof will be convened
to discuss potential changes.
BACKGROUND
Antifungal Agents
Pharmacologic Considerations for Therapy for Candidiasis
Systemic antifungal agents shown to be effective for the treatment of invasive candidiasis comprise 4 major categories: the
polyenes (amphotericin B [AmB] deoxycholate, liposomal
AmB, AmB lipid complex [ABLC], and amphotericin B colloidal dispersion [ABCD, not available in the United States]), the
triazoles (ﬂuconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole, and posaconazole), the echinocandins (caspofungin, anidulafungin, and
micafungin), and ﬂucytosine. Data from a recently completed
clinical trial comparing isavuconazole to an echinocandin for
treatment of invasive candidiasis are unavailable at this time.
Clinicians should become familiar with strategies to optimize
efﬁcacy through an understanding of relevant pharmacokinetic
properties.
Amphotericin B
Most experience with AmB is with the deoxycholate preparation. Three lipid formulations of AmB have been developed
and approved for use in humans: ABLC, ABCD, and liposomal
AmB. These agents possess the same spectrum of activity as
AmB deoxycholate, but daily dosing regimens and toxicity proﬁles differ for each agent. The 3 lipid formulation AmB agents
have different pharmacological properties and rates of treatment-related adverse events and should not be interchanged
without careful consideration. In this document, a reference
to AmB, without a speciﬁc dose or other discussion of form,
should be taken to be a reference to the general use of any of
the AmB preparations. For most forms of invasive candidiasis,
the typical intravenous dosage for AmB deoxycholate is 0.5–0.7
mg/kg daily, but dosages as high as 1 mg/kg daily should be
considered for invasive Candida infections caused by less susceptible species, such as C. glabrata and C. krusei. The typical
dosage for lipid formulation AmB is 3–5 mg/kg daily when used
for invasive candidiasis. Nephrotoxicity is the most common serious adverse effect associated with AmB deoxycholate therapy,
resulting in acute kidney injury in up to 50% of recipients and
an electrolyte-wasting tubular acidosis in a majority of patients
[40, 41]. Lipid formulations of AmB are more expensive than
AmB deoxycholate, but all have considerably less nephrotoxicity [42, 43]. Most observers agree that lipid formulations, with
the exception of ABCD, have fewer infusion-related reactions
than AmB deoxycholate. The impact of the pharmacokinetics
and differences in toxicity of lipid formulations of AmB have
not been formally examined in clinical trials. We are not
aware of any forms of candidiasis for which lipid formulations
of AmB are superior to AmB deoxycholate in terms of clinical
efﬁcacy. In addition, we are not aware of any situation in which
lipid formulations should not be used, with the exception of urinary tract infections, because of reduced renal excretion of these
formulations. Animal model studies suggest a pharmacokinetic
and therapeutic advantage for liposomal AmB in the CNS [44].
Data demonstrating that AmB deoxycholate–induced nephrotoxicity is associated with a 6.6-fold increase in mortality have
led many clinicians to use lipid formulations of AmB in proven
or suspected candidiasis, especially among patients in a highrisk environment, such as an ICU [45].
Triazoles
Fluconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole, posaconazole, and a
new expanded-spectrum triazole, isavuconazole, demonstrate
similar activity against most Candida species [46–51]. Each of
the azoles has less activity against C. glabrata and C. krusei
than against other Candida species. All of the azole antifungals
inhibit cytochrome P450 enzymes to some degree [52]. Thus,
clinicians must carefully consider the inﬂuence on a patient’s
drug regimen when adding or removing an azole. In large clinical trials, ﬂuconazole demonstrated efﬁcacy comparable to that
of AmB deoxycholate for the treatment of candidemia [21, 22]
and is also considered to be standard therapy for oropharyngeal,
esophageal, and vaginal candidiasis, as well as urinary tract infections [53, 54]. Fluconazole is readily absorbed, with oral bioavailability resulting in concentrations equal to approximately
90% of those achieved by intravenous administration [55]. Absorption is not affected by food consumption, gastric pH, or disease state. Among the triazoles, ﬂuconazole has the greatest
penetration into the cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) and vitreous,
achieving concentrations of >70% of those in serum [56–59].
For this reason, it is often used in the treatment of CNS and intraocular Candida infections. Fluconazole achieves urine concentrations that are 10–20 times the concentrations in serum
and, thus, is the preferred treatment option for symptomatic
cystitis [59]. For patients with invasive candidiasis, ﬂuconazole
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Candidiasis • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • e11
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
should be administered with an average loading dose of 800 mg
(12 mg/kg), followed by an average daily dose of 400 mg (6 mg/
kg). The higher-dose level (800 mg daily, 12 mg/kg) is often recommended for therapy of susceptible C. glabrata infections, but
this has not been validated in clinical trials. Fluconazole elimination is almost entirely renal; thus, a dose reduction is needed
in patients with creatinine clearance <50 mL/minute.
Itraconazole is only available in oral formulations. It has not
been well studied for invasive candidiasis, and is generally reserved for patients with mucosal candidiasis, especially those
who have experienced treatment failure with ﬂuconazole [60].
Gastrointestinal absorption is variable among patients and is
greater for the oral solution compared with the capsule formulation. Histamine receptor antagonists and proton pump inhibitors result in decreased absorption of the capsule formulation,
whereas acidic beverages enhance absorption [61]. Administration of the capsule formulation with food increases absorption,
but the oral solution is better absorbed on an empty stomach
[62]. Oral formulations are dosed in adults at 200 mg 3 times
daily for 3 days, then 200 mg once or twice daily thereafter.
Voriconazole has demonstrated effectiveness for both mucosal and invasive candidiasis [23,63].Its clinical use has been primarily for step-down oral therapy in patients with infection due
to C. krusei and ﬂuconazole-resistant, voriconazole-susceptible
C. glabrata. CSF and vitreous concentrations are >50% of serum
concentration, and voriconazole has been shown to be efﬁcacious in case series for these infection sites [64–66]. Voriconazole does not accumulate in active form in the urine and thus
should not be used for urinary candidiasis. The oral bioavailability of voriconazole is excellent and is not affected by gastric
pH, but it decreases when the drug is administered with food
[67,68]. In adults, the recommended oral dosing regimen for candidiasis includes a loading dose of 400 mg (6 mg/kg) twice daily
for 2 doses, followed by 200–300 mg (3–4 mg/kg) twice daily.
Intravenous voriconazole is complexed to a cyclodextrin molecule; after 2 loading doses of 6 mg/kg every 12 hours, a maintenance dosage of 3–4 mg/kg every 12 hours is recommended.
Because of the potential for cyclodextrin accumulation and
possible nephrotoxicity among patients with signiﬁcant renal
dysfunction, intravenous voriconazole is not currently recommended for patients with a creatinine clearance <50 mL/minute.
However, retrospective examination of intravenous voriconazole use in patients with varying degrees of renal function
below this cutoff value has not identiﬁed toxic effects, mitigating some of these concerns [69, 70]. Oral voriconazole does not
require dosage adjustment for renal insufﬁciency, but it is the
only triazole that requires dosage reduction for patients with
mild to moderate hepatic impairment [71].
Common polymorphisms in the gene encoding the primary
metabolic enzyme for voriconazole result in wide variability of
serum levels [72]. Drug–drug interactions are common with
voriconazole and should be considered when initiating and
discontinuing treatment with this compound [52]. Voriconazole has not been studied systematically in ﬂuconazole-resistant
Candida species, and with the exception of C. krusei, use is currently discouraged. Each of the triazoles can be associated with
uncommon side effects. However, several effects are unique to
voriconazole or more commonly associated with higher voriconazole concentrations, including hepatic injury, visual side effects, photosensitivity, periostitis, and CNS side effects [73–75].
Posaconazole does not have an indication for primary candidiasis therapy. It demonstrates in vitro activity against Candida
species that is similar to that of voriconazole, but clinical data
are inadequate to make an evidence-based recommendation
for treatment of candidiasis other than oropharyngeal candidiasis [76]. Posaconazole is currently available as an extended-release tablet, an oral suspension, and an intravenous solution.
The tablet formulation, given as 300 mg twice daily for 2 doses,
then 300 mg daily produces predictable serum concentrations
and excellent drug exposure and requires only once-daily dosing [77, 78].The oral suspension has unpredictable bioavailability [79–81]. Intravenous posaconazole is given as 300 mg twice
daily for 2 doses, then 300 mg daily.
Isavuconazole is a recently approved expanded-spectrum triazole antifungal with excellent in vitro activity against Candida
species. Preliminary analysis of the recently completed large international double-blind trial comparing isavuconazole to an
echinocandin for invasive candidiasis suggests that isavuconazole did not meet criteria for noninferiority (personal communication, Astellas US).
Echinocandins
Caspofungin, anidulafungin, and micafungin are available only
as parenteral preparations [82–84]. The minimum inhibitory
concentrations (MICs) of the echinocandins are low for most
Candida species, including C. glabrata and C. krusei [48–50].
However, recent case series have described treatment failure associated with resistant strains of C. glabrata [85, 86]. Candida
parapsilosis demonstrates innately higher MICs to the echinocandins than do most other Candida species, which raises the
concern that C. parapsilosis may be less responsive to the
echinocandins.
Each of these agents has been studied for the treatment of
esophageal candidiasis [24, 87, 88] and invasive candidiasis
[25–34], and each has demonstrated efﬁcacy in these situations.
Recent pooled analyses of almost exclusively nonneutropenic
patients included in randomized invasive candidiasis treatment
trials suggest a survival advantage associated with initial echinocandin therapy [19].
All echinocandins have minimal adverse effects. The pharmacologic properties in adults are also very similar, and each
is administered once daily intravenously [82–84]. Echinocandins achieve therapeutic concentrations in all infection
sites with the exception of the eye, CNS, and urine [59]. The
e12 • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • Pappas et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
major route of elimination is nonenzymatic degradation. None
of the echinocandins require dosage adjustment for renal insufﬁciency or dialysis. Both caspofungin and micafungin undergo
minimal hepatic metabolism, but neither drug is a major substrate for cytochrome P450. Caspofungin is the only echinocandin for which dosage reduction is recommended for patients
with moderate to severe hepatic dysfunction. The usual intravenous dosing regimens for invasive candidiasis are as follows:
caspofungin: loading dose 70 mg, then 50 mg daily; anidulafungin: loading dose 200 mg, then 100 mg daily; and micafungin:
100 mg daily (no loading dose needed).
Flucytosine
Flucytosine demonstrates broad antifungal activity against most
Candida species, with the exception of C. krusei. The compound is available in the United States only as an oral formulation. The drug has a short half-life (2.4–4.8 hours) and
is ordinarily administered at a dosage of 25 mg/kg 4 times
daily for patients with normal renal function. Flucytosine
demonstrates excellent absorption after oral administration
(80%–90%), and most of the drug is excreted unchanged
(microbiologically active) in the urine [89, 90]; dose adjustment
is necessary for patients with renal dysfunction [91, 92].The
compound exhibits high penetration into the CNS and eye.
Concentration-dependent toxicity results in bone marrow suppression and hepatitis.
Flucytosine is usually given in combination with another antifungal agent due to a high rate of emergence of resistance during monotherapy [93]. The most common use of ﬂucytosine in
the setting of Candida infection is in combination with AmB for
patients with more refractory infections, such as Candida endocarditis, meningitis, or endophthalmitis. Occasionally, it is used
for the treatment of symptomatic urinary tract candidiasis due
to ﬂuconazole-resistant C. glabrata [94].
Pediatric Dosing
There is considerable variation in the pharmacokinetics of antifungal agents between adult and pediatric patients, and the
data on dosing in pediatric patients are limited. The pharmacological properties of antifungal agents in children and infants
have been reviewed in detail [95]. The optimal dose of AmB deoxycholate in neonates has not been clearly deﬁned; a dosage of
1 mg/kg is generally used [96–98]. The safety, efﬁcacy, area
under the curve, and maximal concentration of ABLC 2–5
mg/kg day are similar in adults and children [99]. The pharmacokinetics of liposomal AmB in neonates and children suggest
that both volume and clearance are affected by weight [100].
Flucytosine clearance is directly proportional to glomerular
ﬁltration rate, and infants with a very low birth weight may
accumulate high plasma concentrations because of poor renal
function due to immaturity [101]. Thus, the use of ﬂucytosine
without careful monitoring of serum drug levels is discouraged
in this group of patients.
Fluconazole pharmacokinetics vary with age, and the drug
is rapidly cleared in children. Thus, a daily ﬂuconazole dose
of 12 mg/kg is necessary for neonates and children [102–105].
Voriconazole pharmacokinetics are also highly variable in children [106–108]. To attain plasma exposures comparable to
those in adults receiving 4 mg/kg every 12 hours, a loading
dose of intravenous voriconazole of 9 mg/kg twice daily, followed by 8 mg/kg twice daily is recommended in children.
The recommended oral dose is 9 mg/kg twice daily (maximum
dose 350 mg) [95, 107]. There are no data on voriconazole dosing in children <2 years old, and there are no pediatric studies
examining the pharmacokinetics of the intravenous formulation, the oral suspension, or the extended-release tablets of
posaconazole.
Caspofungin and micafungin are approved by the US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in children. Caspofungin dosing is based on body surface area rather than weight. Dosing in children is a loading dose of 70 mg/m2, followed by 50 mg/
m2/day. Preliminary studies suggest an optimal dose of caspofungin in neonates of 25 mg/m2/day. The current recommendation
for micafungin for invasive candidiasis is 2 mg/kg/day, with the
option to increase to 4 mg/kg/day in children <40 kg. The optimal dose of micafungin in neonates is unknown, but likely to be
10 mg/kg/day or greater [109].Anidulafungin should be dosed at
1.5 mg/kg/day for neonates and children [110–112].
Considerations During Pregnancy
AmB is the treatment of choice for invasive candidiasis in pregnant women [113]. Fluconazole, itraconazole, posaconazole,
and isavuconazole should be avoided in pregnant women, especially those in the ﬁrst trimester, because of the possibility of
birth defects associated with their use. Voriconazole is contraindicated during pregnancy because of fetal abnormalities
observed in animals. There are few data concerning the echinocandins; thus, their use is cautioned during pregnancy. Flucytosine is contraindicated during pregnancy because of fetal
abnormalities observed in animals.
Therapeutic Drug Monitoring
Therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) for itraconazole, voriconazole, posaconazole, and ﬂucytosine has been shown to be useful for optimizing efﬁcacy and limiting toxicity in patients
receiving therapy for a variety of invasive fungal infections, including mucosal and invasive candidiasis [114]. The basis for
TDM is widely variable concentrations among patients and a
strong relationship between concentration and efﬁcacy and/or
toxicity.
For itraconazole, when measured by high-pressure liquid
chromatography (HPLC), both itraconazole and its bioactive
hydroxy-itraconazole metabolite are reported, the sum of
which should be considered in assessing drug levels. Treatment
success has been associated with concentrations ≥1 mg/L and
toxicity with concentrations >5 mg/L. Bioassay levels are 3- to
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Candidiasis • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • e13
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
7-fold higher than those measured by HPLC. Because of nonlinear pharmacokinetics in adults and genetic differences in metabolism, there is both intrapatient and interpatient variability
in serum voriconazole concentrations [115–118]. TDM should
be considered for patients receiving voriconazole, because drug
toxicity has been observed at higher serum concentrations and
reduced clinical response has been observed at lower concentrations [117, 118]. The therapeutic trough concentration window
for voriconazole is 1–5.5 mg/L. Few data are available to support a speciﬁc concentration to optimize posaconazole efﬁcacy.
Flucytosine monitoring is predominantly used to prevent concentration-associated toxicity. Peak concentrations <100 mg/L
are recommended to avoid the predictable liver and bone marrow effects [119].
Antifungal Susceptibility Testing
Intensive efforts to develop standardized, reproducible, and relevant susceptibility testing methods for fungi have resulted in
the development of the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) M27-A3 and the European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST) methodologies for
susceptibility testing of yeasts [120]. Interpretive breakpoints
for susceptibility take into account the MIC, as well as pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic data and animal model data. They
are reported for each species. Breakpoints have been established
for most, but not all, drugs for the 5 most common Candida
species [47, 50, 121, 122] (Table 1).
In many instances, clinical breakpoints have decreased from
those used previously. For example, the prior Candida clinical
breakpoint for susceptibility to ﬂuconazole was ≤8 mg/L. With
the new interpretation, the susceptible value has been reduced to
≤2 mg/L for C. albicans. For C. glabrata, there is no breakpoint
established for susceptibility to ﬂuconazole, itraconazole, posaconazole, or voriconazole (Table 1).
When there is no clinical breakpoint established, the epidemiologic cutoff value (ECV) based on an examination of the
distribution of MICs within a species can be used. The ECV
is deﬁned as the MIC value that excludes non–wild type strains,
notably isolates that are likely to contain a resistant mutant [50,
123]. The addition of the ECV method is particularly useful for
detecting emergence of resistance in a Candida species at an
institution.
The susceptibility of Candida to the currently available antifungal agents is generally predictable if the species of the infecting isolate is known. Currently, antifungal resistance in
C. albicans is uncommon. However, individual isolates may
not necessarily follow this general pattern [124]. Recent surveillance studies suggest that triazole resistance among C. glabrata
isolates has increased to a degree that is it difﬁcult to rely upon
these agents for therapy in the absence of susceptibility testing
[12,125,126].A similar trend has begun to emerge for a smaller
proportion of C. glabrata isolates and the echinocandins [35,85,
125]. The value of susceptibility testing for other Candida species is less clear, although resistance among C. tropicalis and
C. parapsilosis has been reported from tertiary care institutions
that have extensive use of antifungal agents [127, 128]. Because
of these trends, susceptibility testing is increasingly used to
guide the management of candidemia and invasive candidiasis.
Diagnosis of Candidiasis
Cultures of blood or other samples collected under sterile conditions have long been considered diagnostic gold standards for
invasive candidiasis. Nonculture diagnostic tests, such as
Table 1.
Clinical Breakpoints for Antifungal Agents Against Common
Candida Species
Candida
Organism
Clinical Breakpoint, µg/mLa
Antifungal
Agent
S
SDD
I
R
C. albicans
Fluconazole
≤2
4
≥8
Itraconazole
≤0.12
0.25–0.5
≥1
Voriconazole
≤0.12
0.25–0.5
≥1
Posaconazole
Anidulafungin
≤0.25
0.5
≥1
Caspofungin
≤0.25
0.5
≥1
Micafungin
≤0.25
0.5
≥1
C. glabrata
Fluconazole
32
≥64
Itraconazole
Voriconazole
Posaconazole
Anidulafungin
≤0.12
0.25
≥0.5
Caspofungin
≤0.12
0.25
≥0.5
Micafungin
≤0.06
0.12
≥0.25
C. parapsilosis
Fluconazole
≤2
4
≥8
Itraconazole
Voriconazole
≤0.12
0.25–0.5
≥1
Posaconazole
Anidulafungin
≤2
4
≥8
Caspofungin
≤2
4
≥8
Micafungin
≤2
4
≥8
C. tropicalis
Fluconazole
≤2
4
≥8
Itraconazole
Voriconazole
≤0.12
0.25–0.5
≥1
Posaconazole
Anidulafungin
≤0.25
0.5
≥1
Caspofungin
≤0.25
0.5
≥1
Micafungin
≤0.25
0.5
≥1
C. krusei
Fluconazole
Itraconazole
Voriconazole
≤0.5
1
≥2
Posaconazole
Anidulafungin
≤0.25
0.5
≥1
Caspofungin
≤0.25
0.5
≥1
Micafungin
≤0.25
0.5
≥1
Where no values are entered, there are insufficient data to establish clinical breakpoints.
Abbreviations: I, intermediate; MIC, minimum inhibitory concentration; R, resistant; S,
susceptible; SDD, susceptible dose-dependent.
a Clinical breakpoints adopted by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute.
e14 • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • Pappas et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
antigen, antibody, or β-D-glucan detection assays, and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) are now entering clinical practice as adjuncts to cultures. If used and interpreted
judiciously, these tests can identify more patients with invasive candidiasis and better direct antifungal therapy. To
fully realize the beneﬁts of combining culture and nonculture
tests, however, clinicians must carefully consider the types of
invasive candidiasis, understand the strengths and limitations
of each assay, and interpret test results in the context of the
clinical setting.
Use of Cultures in the Diagnosis of Invasive Candidiasis
Invasive candidiasis encompasses 3 entities: candidemia in the
absence of deep-seated candidiasis, candidemia associated with
deep-seated candidiasis, and deep-seated candidiasis in the absence of candidemia [20]. The distribution of these entities is
likely to differ among centers; on balance, data suggest that
the groups are approximately equal in size [129].
The overall sensitivity of blood cultures for diagnosing invasive candidiasis is roughly 50% [20]. The limit of detection of
blood cultures is ≤1 colony-forming unit/mL [130, 131]. The
limit of detection for cultures is at or below that of PCR
[132–135]. As such, blood cultures should be positive during
the vast majority of active Candida bloodstream infections.
They may be negative in cases of extremely low-level candidemia, intermittent candidemia, deep-seated candidiasis that persists after sterilization of the bloodstream, or deep-seated
candidiasis resulting from direct inoculation of Candida in
the absence of candidemia. Blood cultures are limited by slow
turnaround times (median time to positivity of 2–3 days, ranging from 1 to ≥7 days), and the fact that they may become positive relatively late in the disease course [130, 136]. Cultures of
tissues or ﬂuid recovered from infected sites during deep-seated
candidiasis also exhibit poor sensitivity (often <50%) and slow
turnaround times, and require invasive sampling procedures
that may be dangerous or contraindicated due to underlying
medical conditions [137].
Antigen and Antibody Detection
Candida antigen and anti-Candida antibody detection has
gained greater acceptance in Europe than the United States.
In general, antigen detection is limited by rapid clearance
from the bloodstream [138]. Concerns have been expressed
about the reliability of antibody detection in immunosuppressed hosts, but assays have performed well in patients with
neutropenia and cell-mediated immune defects (including hematopoietic cell and solid organ transplant recipients) [138,
139].Serum immunoglobulin G (IgG) responses against speciﬁc
antigens have typically performed better than immunoglobulin
M (IgM) responses, suggesting that many patients mount amnestic responses or have ongoing, subclinical tissue invasion
[139]. The best-studied test is a combined mannan/antimannan
antibody assay, which is currently approved for use in Europe,
but not the United States (Platelia Candida Ag and Ab; BioRad). In a meta-analysis of 14 studies, the sensitivity/speciﬁcity
for the diagnosis of invasive candidiasis of mannan and antimannan IgG individually were 58%/93% and 59%/83%, respectively [140]. Values for the combined assay were 83% and 86%,
with best performances for C. albicans, C. glabrata, and C. tropicalis infections. In one study of candidemia, at least one test
was positive before blood culture in 73% of patients [141]. In a
study of hepatosplenic candidiasis, at least one test was positive
before radiographic changes in 86% of patients [142]. This assay
is not used widely in the United States, and its role in the diagnosis and management of invasive candidiasis is unclear.
β-D-Glucan detection
β-D-glucan is a cell wall constituent of Candida species, Aspergillus species, Pneumocystis jiroveci, and several other fungi. A
serum β-D-glucan assay (Fungitell; Associates of Cape Cod,
East Falmouth, Massachusetts) has been approved by the
FDA as an adjunct to cultures for the diagnosis of invasive fungal infections. True-positive results are not speciﬁc for invasive
candidiasis, but rather suggest the possibility of an invasive fungal infection. For this reason, among patient populations that
are also at risk for invasive mold infections, such as hematopoietic cell transplant recipients, β-D-glucan offers a theoretical advantage over more narrow assays for candidiasis. β-D-glucan
detection can identify cases of invasive candidiasis days to
weeks prior to positive blood cultures, and shorten the time
to initiation of antifungal therapy [143].Prophylactic or empiric
antifungal treatment is likely to impact test performance. On
the one hand, antifungal agents may reduce diagnostic sensitivity [144–146], but decreasing β-D-glucan levels may also correlate with responses to antifungal therapy [147].
In meta-analyses of β-D-glucan studies, the pooled sensitivity
and speciﬁcity for diagnosing invasive candidiasis were 75%–
80% and 80%, respectively [144–146]. A number of issues complicate the interpretation of these data, including uncertainties
about the best cutoff value for a positive result, number of positive tests required to establish a diagnosis, and optimal timing
and frequency of testing among at-risk patients. There is
marked heterogeneity among studies in how they address
these issues, as well as in patient and control populations,
range and type of fungal pathogens targeted, invasive candidiasis disease entities, distributions of Candida species, prior antifungal use, speciﬁc β-D-glucan assays employed, and other
aspects of study design and statistical interpretation.
The major concern about β-D-glucan detection is the potential for poor speciﬁcity and false positivity, which may be particularly problematic in the patient populations for which
nonculture diagnostics would be most helpful. For example,
false-positive results are rare in healthy controls, but decidedly
more common among patients in an ICU [148]. Causes of
false positivity include other systemic infections, such as
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Candidiasis • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • e15
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
gram-positive and gram-negative bacteremia, certain antibiotics, such as intravenous amoxicillin-clavulanate (not available
in the United States), hemodialysis, fungal colonization, receipt
of albumin or immunoglobulin, use of surgical gauze or other
material containing glucan, and mucositis or other disruptions
of gastrointestinal mucosa [149–154]. The speciﬁcity of β-Dglucan can be improved by requiring consecutive positive results rather than a single result, but false positivity remains a
signiﬁcant limitation if the above-listed factors are common
in the population tested. As an extreme example, the per-patient
sensitivity/speciﬁcity and positive and negative predictive values
of routine surveillance β-D-glucan testing in a recent study of
lung transplant recipients were 64%/9% and 14%/50%, respectively [155]. Moreover, 90% of patients had at least one positive
β-D-glucan result. Therefore, the test will be most useful if targeted to subgroups of patients whose clinical course or risk factors are particularly suggestive of invasive candidiasis or other
fungal infection.
The role of β-D-glucan testing of samples other than serum
in the diagnosis of invasive candidiasis is not established. Studies of β-D-glucan testing of CSF reported sensitivity and specificity of 100% and 95%–98%, respectively, for the diagnosis of
non-Candida fungal CNS infections [156, 157]. β-D-glucan detection was highly sensitive and speciﬁc in a rabbit model of hematogenous C. albicans meningoencephalitis [158]. Limited
data suggest that positive predictive values of β-D-glucan in
bronchoalveolar lavage ﬂuid are poor for diagnosing fungal
pneumonia [159]. There are case reports for testing of samples
collected from other sites of invasive Candida infection [160].
Limited data exist pertaining to the usefulness of β-D-glucan
testing in children [161]. The optimal threshold for positivity of
β-D-glucan testing in children is not known. In studies of uninfected immunocompetent individuals, mean β-D-glucan levels are slightly higher in children than adults [162]. Currently, it
is not recommended to use β-D-glucan testing to guide pediatric clinical decision making.
Polymerase Chain Reaction
Candida PCR shares many of the potential beneﬁts and shortcomings of β-D-glucan detection. Compared to cultures, PCR
assays of various blood fractions have been shown to shorten
the time to diagnosis of invasive candidiasis and initiation of
antifungal therapy [134, 135]. The pooled sensitivity and specificity of PCR for suspected invasive candidiasis in a recent metaanalysis were 95% and 92%, respectively [134]. In probable invasive candidiasis, sensitivity of PCR and blood cultures was
85% and 38%, respectively. The impact of antifungal agents
on diagnostic sensitivity was unclear. Data among patients colonized with Candida were surprisingly limited, but there was a
trend toward lower speciﬁcity.
A major limitation of PCR studies is the lack of standardized
methodologies and multicenter validation of assay performance.
A multicenter US study assessing the performance of a self-contained instrument that ampliﬁes and detects Candida DNA by
PCR and T2 magnetic resonance (T2 Biosystems, Lexington,
Massachusetts), respectively, has been completed [163]. This
assay is FDA approved, but its role in the early diagnosis and
management of candidemia remains unclear until more data
are available. PCR has potential advantages over β-D-glucan
or antigen-antibody assays, including the capacity for species
identiﬁcation, detection of molecular markers for drug resistance, and multiplex formatting. In Europe, a whole-blood,
multiplex real-time PCR assay (SeptiFast, Roche) that detects
19 bacteria and 6 fungi (C. albicans, C. glabrata, C. parapsilosis,
C. tropicalis, C. krusei, and Aspergillus fumigatus) has been investigated in several studies of sepsis and neutropenic fever.
Among patients with candidemia in one study, the sensitivity
of the test was 94%; the only negative result was observed
with C. famata candidemia [164]. The role of PCR in testing
samples other than blood is not established.
Nonculture Diagnostic Testing for Blood Culture–Negative
Invasive Candidiasis
The overwhelming majority of studies have examined nonculture diagnostics in the setting of candidemia. More limited
data on deep-seated candidiasis demonstrate how these tests
may identify cases that are currently missed by blood cultures.
In a single-center study of prospectively enrolled patients, the
sensitivities/speciﬁcities of the Fungitell β-D-glucan assay and
a real-time quantitative PCR assay (ViraCor-IBT, Lee’s Summit,
Missouri) for invasive candidiasis were 56%/73% and 80%/70%,
respectively [132]. More importantly, the sensitivities of contemporaneously collected blood cultures, β-D-glucan assay,
and PCR samples among patients with deep-seated candidiasis
(mostly intra-abdominal candidiasis) were 21%, 67%, and 88%,
respectively. The combination of either a positive blood culture
or positive β-D-glucan assay had sensitivity for invasive candidiasis of 79%; a positive blood culture or positive PCR sample
was 98% sensitive. A second study investigated the serum β-Dglucan assay, Candida score (a predictive score for invasive candidiasis based on clinical parameters and burden of Candida
colonization), and Candida colonization indices (predictive
scores based on burden of colonization) among prospectively
enrolled patients who were in surgical ICUs at 2 hospitals and
who were at particularly high risk for intra-abdominal candidiasis [143]. The sensitivity/speciﬁcity of 2 consecutive positive βD-glucan results was 65%/78%. In contrast, the sensitivity of
blood cultures was only 7%. In addition to identifying cases
missed by blood cultures, the β-D-glucan assay was positive a
median of 5 and 6 days prior to positive intra-abdominal cultures and institution of antifungal therapy, respectively. The
sensitivities of Candida scores and colonization indices were
comparable to β-D-glucan, but speciﬁcities were poorer
(≤43%).
e16 • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • Pappas et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
The interpretation of speciﬁcity in these studies was complicated by the fact that negative controls were also at risk for invasive candidiasis. Therefore, it is unclear if positive test results
for controls were false positives (as deﬁned in the studies) or
true positives that were missed due to the poor sensitivity of
intra-abdominal and blood cultures. Indeed, this is a central
challenge in assessing new diagnostics for invasive candidiasis:
How can test performance be accurately measured when the
gold standard is inadequate?
I. What Is the Treatment for Candidemia in Nonneutropenic Patients?
Recommendations
1. An echinocandin (caspofungin: loading dose 70 mg, then
50 mg daily; micafungin: 100 mg daily; anidulafungin: loading dose 200 mg, then 100 mg daily) is recommended as initial therapy (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
2. Fluconazole, intravenous or oral, 800-mg (12 mg/kg) loading dose, then 400 mg (6 mg/kg) daily is an acceptable alternative to an echinocandin as initial therapy in selected
patients, including those who are not critically ill and who
are considered unlikely to have a ﬂuconazole-resistant Candida species (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
3. Testing for azole susceptibility is recommended for all
bloodstream and other clinically relevant Candida isolates.
Testing for echinocandin susceptibility should be considered
in patients who have had prior treatment with an echinocandin and among those who have infection with C. glabrata
or C. parapsilosis (strong recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
4. Transition from an echinocandin to ﬂuconazole (usually
within 5–7 days) is recommended for patients who are clinically stable, have isolates that are susceptible to ﬂuconazole
(eg, C. albicans), and have negative repeat blood cultures following initiation of antifungal therapy (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
5. For infection due to C. glabrata, transition to higher-dose
ﬂuconazole 800 mg (12 mg/kg) daily or voriconazole 200–
300 (3–4 mg/kg) twice daily should only be considered
among patients with ﬂuconazole-susceptible or voriconazole-susceptible isolates (strong recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
6. Lipid formulation AmB (3–5 mg/kg daily) is a reasonable
alternative if there is intolerance, limited availability, or resistance to other antifungal agents (strong recommendation;
high-quality evidence).
7. Transition from AmB to ﬂuconazole is recommended after
5–7 days among patients who have isolates that are susceptible to ﬂuconazole, who are clinically stable, and in whom repeat cultures on antifungal therapy are negative (strong
recommendation; high-quality evidence).
8. Among patients with suspected azole- and echinocandinresistant Candida infections, lipid formulation AmB (3–5 mg/
kg daily) is recommended (strong recommendation; lowquality evidence).
9. Voriconazole 400 mg (6 mg/kg) twice daily for 2 doses, then
200 mg (3 mg/kg) twice daily is effective for candidemia, but
offers little advantage over ﬂuconazole as initial therapy
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence). Voriconazole is recommended as step-down oral therapy for selected
cases of candidemia due to C. krusei (strong recommendation;
low-quality evidence).
10. All nonneutropenic patients with candidemia should have
a dilated ophthalmological examination, preferably performed by an ophthalmologist, within the ﬁrst week after diagnosis (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
11. Follow-up blood cultures should be performed every day or
every other day to establish the time point at which candidemia has been cleared (strong recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
12. Recommended duration of therapy for candidemia without
obvious metastatic complications is for 2 weeks after documented clearance of Candida species from the bloodstream
and resolution of symptoms attributable to candidemia
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
Candidemia has emerged as one of the most common causes of
healthcare-associated bloodstream infections, and in many US
hospitals, candidemia represents the third or fourth most common hospital-acquired bloodstream isolate. In most clinical settings, C. albicans is the most commonly isolated species, but the
non-albicans Candida species together represent approximately
50% of the bloodstream isolates, and this has been a growing
trend in many hospitals throughout the world for more than
a decade [8–12].
There are signiﬁcant challenges in treating candidemia and invasive candidiasis. First, the infection is associated with high
mortality. Earlier therapy is associated with better overall outcomes [14–18], but there remain signiﬁcant limitations to early
diagnosis. The development of rapid diagnostic assays has been
slow; thus, clinicians continue to rely on cultures to establish a
diagnosis [20]. Second, there is considerable geographic, centerto-center, and even unit-to-unit variability of species causing
candidemia [12]; each Candida species presents its own unique
challenges with respect to virulence, pathogenicity, and antifungal susceptibility. Third, despite the overall robust nature of the
randomized controlled trials examining treatment of candidemia
and other forms of invasive candidiasis, no single trial has demonstrated the clear superiority of one therapeutic agent over another
[19, 21–34]. Fourth, the recent emergence of multidrug-resistant
Candida species will complicate the selection of antifungal therapy
in the immediate future [10, 12, 35–38].
The selection of any particular agent for the treatment of
candidemia should take into account a history of recent azole or
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Candidiasis • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • e17
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
echinocandin exposure, a history of intolerance to an antifungal
agent, the dominant Candida species and current susceptibility
data in a particular clinical unit, severity of illness, relevant comorbidities, and evidence of involvement of the CNS, cardiac
valves, and/or visceral organs. The risk of mortality among patients with candidemia ranges from 10% to 47% [6–8, 13], but
the actual disease-associated mortality is more likely 10%–20%,
with the risk of death being related to increasing age, higher
Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II (APACHE
II) scores, infecting Candida species, immunosuppressive
agents, preexisting renal dysfunction, venous catheter retention,
and antifungal selection [8, 19, 165–167]. Early initiation of effective antifungal therapy and source control is critical in the
successful treatment of candidemia, as demonstrated by data
suggesting signiﬁcantly higher mortality rates among patients
with candidemia in whom antifungal therapy was delayed or
considered inadequate, and/or in whom source control was
not promptly attained [14, 16–18, 168].
The echinocandins demonstrate signiﬁcant fungicidal activity against most Candida species, and each of these agents has
demonstrated success in approximately 70%–75% of patients
in randomized, comparative clinical trials [24–28, 31, 32]. Despite the need for intravenous administration, their superb efﬁcacy, favorable safety proﬁle, limited drug interactions, and
concerns about ﬂuconazole resistance have led many experts
to favor the echinocandins as initial therapy for most adult patients with candidemia. Few studies comparing different echinocandins have been performed [28, 169], but most experts
agree that these agents are sufﬁciently similar to be considered
interchangeable.
Only one study comparing an echinocandin to ﬂuconazole
has been performed, and the results from this study suggest a
strong trend toward more favorable outcomes with anidulafungin
compared with ﬂuconazole as primary therapy for candidemia
[27]. In a subanalysis of patients with C. albicans infections,
there was a signiﬁcant improvement in global response among
those receiving anidulafungin [31].In another subanalysis of critically ill patients from this trial, those receiving anidulafungin had
signiﬁcantly better responses at end of therapy compared with
ﬂuconazole-treated patients [170]. A combined analysis of 7 of
the largest randomized clinical trials comparing treatment for
candidemia and invasive candidiasis and involving almost
2000 patients found that initial therapy with an echinocandin
was a signiﬁcant predictor of survival [19]. This same analysis
identiﬁed higher APACHE II score, older age, and infection
with C. tropicalis to be associated with worse outcomes and
higher mortality [19].
It has become common practice for clinicians treating patients with candidemia to initiate an echinocandin, then change
to an oral azole (typically ﬂuconazole) once the patient has become clinically stable [1]. A recent open-label noncomparative
trial assessed outcomes of patients who were treated with
anidulafungin for at least 5 days followed by step-down therapy
to oral ﬂuconazole or voriconazole (if the infecting organism
was susceptible) when they were clinically stable and blood cultures had become negative [34]. There was no difference noted
in outcomes among patients who continued on anidulafungin
throughout the treatment course compared with those who
were changed to an oral azole. Smaller pilot studies from
Latin America and Asia demonstrated similar ﬁndings [33,
171]. Thus, on the basis of these data and other clinical trials
[22, 23, 25, 26, 28, 33, 34, 171], the Expert Panel favors stepdown therapy to ﬂuconazole or voriconazole for patients who
have improved clinically following initial therapy with an echinocandin, have documented clearance of Candida from the
bloodstream, and who are infected with an organism that is
susceptible to ﬂuconazole (eg, C. albicans, C. parapsilosis, and
C. tropicalis) or voriconazole (eg, C. krusei). This transition usually occurs within 5–7 days, but this time is variable and ultimately dependent on patient response and clinician preference.
In many parts of the world, based on success rates reported
from well-designed clinical trials, ﬂuconazole remains standard
therapy for patients with candidemia [21–23, 27]. However, in
light of recent data on the efﬁcacy of echinocandins and increasing resistance to ﬂuconazole, the Expert Panel believes that ﬂuconazole should be considered ﬁrst-line therapy only in patients
who are hemodynamically stable, who have had no previous exposure to azoles, and who do not belong in a group at high risk
for C. glabrata infection, including those who are elderly, have
underlying malignancy, or are diabetic.
In previous iterations of these guidelines, the Expert Panel favored ﬂuconazole over an echinocandin for treatment of candidemia due to C. parapsilosis based on reports of decreased in
vitro activity of echinocandins against this species and of echinocandin resistance among some isolates [11, 12, 172–175]. In
spite of these laboratory observations, there have been no clinical studies that have demonstrated superiority of ﬂuconazole
over the echinocandins for the treatment of C. parapsilosis infections. Moreover, recent observational data from Spain among
almost 200 patients with candidemia due to C. parapsilosis suggested no difference in outcome among patients who received
initial treatment with an echinocandin compared with those
who received other regimens [176]. Any recommendation supporting ﬂuconazole over an echinocandin is generally based on
theoretical concerns rather than on observed therapeutic failure
of the echinocandins in these patients.
Voriconazole was shown to be as effective for candidemia
and invasive candidiasis as the comparator regimen of sequential therapy with AmB for 4–7 days followed by ﬂuconazole
[23]. Voriconazole possesses activity against most Candida species, including C. krusei [177, 178], but the need for more frequent administration, less predictable pharmacokinetics, more
drug interactions, and poor tolerance to the drug make it less
attractive for initial therapy. Parenteral voriconazole appears
e18 • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • Pappas et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
to be safe when administered to those with baseline renal dysfunction, despite concerns based on possible nephrotoxicity
of its vehicle (sulfobutylether β-cyclodextrin) [70]. Voriconazole does not provide predictable activity against ﬂuconazoleresistant C. glabrata [47, 177–179]. It does, however, ﬁll an
important niche for patients who have ﬂuconazole-resistant isolates of C. krusei, C. guilliermondii, or C. glabrata that are voriconazole susceptible and who are ready for transition from an
echinocandin or AmB to oral therapy.
There is little role for oral itraconazole for the treatment of
candidemia, given the similar antifungal spectrum, ease of administration, superior pharmacokinetics, and better tolerability
of ﬂuconazole. Posaconazole has excellent in vitro activity
against most Candida species. The extended-release tablet and
the intravenous formulation could prove useful in the future,
but currently there is no role for posaconazole in the treatment
of candidemia. The broad-spectrum azole isavuconazole demonstrates similar in vitro activity against Candida species, as
do voriconazole and posaconazole, and could prove useful in
the future [180].
AmB has broad activity against all Candida species with the
exception of C. lusitaniae, which is frequently resistant. Lipid
formulations of AmB are preferred to AmB deoxycholate and
should be considered when there is a history of intolerance to
echinocandins and/or azoles, the infection is refractory to
other therapy, the organism is resistant to other agents, or
there is a suspicion of infection due to non-Candida yeasts,
such as Cryptococcus neoformans or Histoplasma capsulatum.
Liposomal AmB, 3 mg/kg daily, has been shown to be as effective as micafungin for treatment of candidemia [26].
The emergence of echinocandin-resistant and echinocandin-/azole-resistant Candida isolates, especially C. glabrata,
clearly has been documented, and this ﬁnding appears to be associated with worse clinical outcomes [10, 12, 35–37, 181, 182].
Fluconazole resistance is a frequent ﬁnding among echinocandin-resistant isolates [9, 10], further complicating therapeutic
choices. There are currently no prospective data to inform a decision, but the Expert Panel favors lipid formulation AmB for
treatment of patients with candidemia due to proven or suspected ﬂuconazole and echinocandin-resistant (multidrug resistant)
strains until more data become available.
Recent data suggest that as many as 16% of patients with candidemia have some manifestation of ocular involvement, and
some of these patients will develop severe, sight-threatening endophthalmitis [70]. Thus, for all patients with candidemia, the
Expert Panel strongly advises a dilated funduscopic examination, preferably performed by an ophthalmologist, within the
ﬁrst week after initiation of speciﬁc antifungal therapy. Some
groups have suggested that it is possible to stratify patients according to risk in an effort to avoid performing ophthalmologic
examinations on all candidemic patients [183]. This approach is
possibly more cost-effective than examining all patients
with candidemia, but the potential beneﬁt of early identiﬁcation of endophthalmitis and prevention of visual loss far outweighs the expense of performing a dilated funduscopic
examination.
Follow-up blood cultures every day or every other day until
demonstration of clearance of Candida from the bloodstream
are helpful to establish the appropriate duration of antifungal
therapy. If there are no metastatic complications of candidemia,
the duration of therapy with systemic antifungal agents should be
14 days following documented clearance of Candida species from
the bloodstream and resolution of signs and symptoms attributable to infection. This recommendation is based on the results of
several prospective, randomized trials in which this rule has been
universally and successfully applied, and it is generally associated
with few complications and relapses [21–23, 26–28, 30, 32–34].
II. Should Central Venous Catheters Be Removed in Nonneutropenic
Patients With Candidemia?
Recommendation
13. CVCs should be removed as early as possible in the course
of candidemia when the source is presumed to be the CVC
and the catheter can be removed safely; this decision should
be individualized for each patient (strong recommendation;
moderate-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
Central venous catheters and other intravascular devices are important risk factors in the development and persistence of candidemia in nonneutropenic patients [5, 7–9, 184]. A CVC is
present in at least 70% of nonneutropenic patients with candidemia at the time that the diagnostic blood culture is obtained
[5, 7–9, 170, 184–187]. The relationship of candidemia to CVCs
has been assumed on the basis of observation, clinical experience, and an understanding of the role of bioﬁlm in the genesis
of bloodstream infections [188, 189]. That candidemia in nonneutropenic patients is commonly due to contaminated CVCs
is undeniable, but there remains controversy as to how best to
distinguish a catheter-associated candidemia from one that is
related to another source, such as the gastrointestinal tract.
There have been no prospective clinical studies designed to
examine CVC management as a primary measurement related
to outcome. Moreover, several retrospective analyses have led to
very different conclusions regarding the necessity and timing of
CVC removal in the candidemic patient [19, 190–193]. Thus,
the controversy continues, with some groups arguing for a
strictly individualized approach to each patient [190]and others
for an approach that removes CVCs in all nonneutropenic candidemic patients in whom it is safe and feasible to do so [19].No
prospective study has demonstrated a survival beneﬁt to early
CVC removal in patients who have candidemia, but most studies have demonstrated a shorter duration of candidemia and/or
a trend toward improved outcomes [14, 21–23, 27, 28, 168, 192–
200]. The recent combined analysis of 7 candidemia trials
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Candidiasis • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • e19
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
observed a survival beneﬁt among those who underwent CVC
removal at some time during treatment for candidemia [19].
The survival beneﬁt applied to patients across all levels of severity of illness as determined by APACHE II scores.
The Expert Panel members strongly believe that CVCs
should be removed if this can be performed safely when candidemia is documented in the nonneutropenic patient. It is intuitive that each patient with candidemia must be managed
individually with respect to CVC removal or retention, but on
balance, the bulk of data supports an approach that leads to
early removal among nonneutropenic patients in whom the
catheter is a likely source of infection.
Among neutropenic patients, the role of the gastrointestinal
tract as a source for disseminated candidiasis is evident from
autopsy studies, but in an individual patient, it is difﬁcult to determine the relative contributions of the gastrointestinal tract vs
the CVC as the primary source of candidemia [195, 201]. An
exception is made for candidemia due to C. parapsilosis,
which is very frequently associated with CVCs [188, 189, 200,
202]. A recent retrospective analysis that included mostly nonneutropenic patients underscored the inﬂuence of early CVC
removal, speciﬁcally among patients with C. parapsilosis bloodstream infection, on clinical outcome [176].
III. What Is the Treatment for Candidemia in Neutropenic Patients?
Recommendations
14. An echinocandin (caspofungin: loading dose 70 mg, then
50 mg daily; micafungin: 100 mg daily; anidulafungin: loading
dose 200 mg, then 100 mg daily) is recommended as initial
therapy (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
15. Lipid formulation AmB, 3–5 mg/kg daily, is an effective
but less attractive alternative because of the potential for toxicity (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
16. Fluconazole, 800-mg (12 mg/kg) loading dose, then 400
mg (6 mg/kg) daily, is an alternative for patients who are
not critically ill and have had no prior azole exposure
(weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
17. Fluconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg) daily, can be used for stepdown therapy during persistent neutropenia in clinically stable
patients who have susceptible isolates and documented bloodstream clearance (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
18. Voriconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg) twice daily for 2 doses,
then 200–300 mg (3–4 mg/kg) twice daily, can be used in situations in which additional mold coverage is desired (weak
recommendation; low-quality evidence). Voriconazole can
also be used as step-down therapy during neutropenia in
clinically stable patients who have had documented bloodstream clearance and isolates that are susceptible to voriconazole (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
19. For infections due to C. krusei, an echinocandin, lipid formulation AmB, or voriconazole is recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
20. Recommended minimum duration of therapy for candidemia without metastatic complications is 2 weeks after documented clearance of Candida from the bloodstream, provided
neutropenia and symptoms attributable to candidemia have resolved (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
21. Ophthalmological ﬁndings of choroidal and vitreal infection are minimal until recovery from neutropenia; therefore,
dilated funduscopic examinations should be performed within the ﬁrst week after recovery from neutropenia (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
22. In the neutropenic patient, sources of candidiasis other
than a CVC (eg, gastrointestinal tract) predominate. Catheter
removal should be considered on an individual basis (strong
recommendation; low-quality evidence).
23. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF)–mobilized
granulocyte transfusions can be considered in cases of persistent candidemia with anticipated protracted neutropenia
(weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
Candidemia that develops in neutropenic patients is a lifethreatening infection associated with acute disseminated candidiasis, a sepsis-like syndrome, multiorgan failure, and death.
Outcomes are particularly poor in people with protracted neutropenia, such as that which develops after induction therapy
for hematologic malignancies [190, 203,204].Candidemia associated with C. tropicalis is associated with particularly poor outcomes in neutropenic hosts. Chronic disseminated candidiasis
(hepatosplenic candidiasis) can ensue as a complication of candidemia in neutropenic patients, especially when patients with
gastrointestinal tract mucositis do not receive antifungal prophylaxis. There are no adequately powered randomized controlled trials of treatment of candidemia in neutropenic
patients. The data are largely derived from single-arm studies,
small subsets of randomized controlled studies that have enrolled mostly nonneutropenic patients, and pooled outcomes
from randomized trials [205, 206].
Historically, candidemia in neutropenic patients was treated
with an AmB formulation. The availability of voriconazole and
the echinocandins has led to greater use of these agents, but
without compelling clinical data. The extensive use of ﬂuconazole for prophylaxis to prevent invasive candidiasis in neutropenic patients and the lack of meaningful prospective data has led
to a diminished therapeutic role for this agent among these patients, except for use as maintenance, or step-down therapy
after organism species and susceptibilities are obtained in clinically stable patients [207].
The numbers of neutropenic patients included in candidemia
treatment studies are small. In these trials, 50% of caspofungin
recipients vs 40% of AmB deoxycholate recipients [25], 68% of
micafungin recipients vs 61% of liposomal AmB recipients [26],
and 69% of micafungin recipients vs 64% of caspofungin
e20 • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • Pappas et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
recipients [28] with neutropenia at onset of therapy were successfully treated. The randomized controlled trial of anidulafungin vs ﬂuconazole enrolled too few neutropenic patients with
candidemia to generate meaningful data regarding efﬁcacy
[27]. In 2 retrospective studies, successful outcomes for primary
treatment of neutropenic patients were reported in 64% of those
receiving AmB deoxycholate, 64% of those receiving ﬂuconazole, and 68% of those receiving caspofungin [29, 208].
Additional insights can be gleaned from data derived from
studies of empiric antifungal therapy involving febrile patients
with neutropenia who had candidemia at baseline. In these studies, baseline candidemia was cleared in 73% of those treated with
AmB deoxycholate vs 82% of those treated with liposomal AmB
[209] and in 67% of those treated with caspofungin vs 50% of
those treated with liposomal AmB [210]. Data from a large randomized trial also suggest that voriconazole is a reasonable choice
for febrile patients with neutropenia and suspected invasive candidiasis for whom additional mold coverage is desired [211].
A systematic review was conducted to analyze available data
generated in treatment trials and empiric therapy trials that enrolled neutropenic patients [205].This included 17 trials that randomized 342 neutropenic patients with documented invasive
candidiasis. Pooling of results favored use of nonpolyenes to
AmB-containing comparators. Another pooled analysis that
summarized results of treating with micafungin or comparators
(liposomal AmB or caspofungin) for candidemia in the setting
of malignancy-associated neutropenia from 2 randomized trials
demonstrated success rates ranging from 53% to 85%, but no signiﬁcant differences among treatment groups [206].
On the basis of these limited data, the success rates of antifungal therapy for candidemia in patients with neutropenia do
not appear to be substantially different from those reported in the
large randomized trials of nonneutropenic patients. However, conclusions may be limited by signiﬁcant enrollment bias of selected
patients. Although these data do not suggest less favorable outcomes associated with ﬂuconazole and voriconazole, many experts
prefer lipid formulation AmB or an echinocandin, which are
fungicidal, as ﬁrst-line agents. Similar to the approach in nonneutropenic patients, the recommended duration of therapy for candidemia in neutropenic patients is for 14 days after resolution of
attributable signs and symptoms and clearance of the bloodstream
of Candida species, provided that there has been recovery from
neutropenia. When neutropenia is protracted, an antifungal drug
should be continued until engraftment. This recommendation is
based on limited data from prospective randomized trials and
has been associated with few complications and relapses [209,210].
The management of intravascular catheters in neutropenic patients with candidemia is less straightforward than in their nonneutropenic counterparts. Distinguishing gut-associated from
vascular catheter–associated candidemia can be difﬁcult in these
patients [201]. The data for catheter removal are less compelling,
and catheter removal often creates signiﬁcant intravenous access
problems. An analysis of 842 patients enrolled in 2 phase 3 treatment trials failed to demonstrate signiﬁcant clinical beneﬁts of
catheter removal in multivariable analyses that adjusted for other
measures of prognostic signiﬁcance [190]. The Expert Panel suggests that catheter removal should be considered on an individual
basis, taking into account feasibility and risk of removal.
An extremely important factor inﬂuencing the outcome of
candidemia in neutropenic patients is the recovery of neutrophils during therapy. In multiple cohort studies of patients
with cancer who had candidemia, and pooled analyses of randomized trials, persistent neutropenia was associated with a
greater chance of treatment failure [190, 203, 204, 212]. This
has led to improvement of strategies to harvest granulocytes
from donors (including community volunteers), using G-CSF
mobilization, which has been shown to be safe and feasible
[213]. Analysis of subsets of people within phase 1/2 granulocyte infusion studies, retrospective observations, and small cohort studies suggest that G-CSF–mobilized granulocyte
transfusions may be of beneﬁt in patients with persistent candidemia and prolonged neutropenia [213–215]. In a randomized
controlled trial, granulocyte infusions were associated with few
toxicities, but small numbers of patients in infection subgroups
limited conclusions of efﬁcacy [216]. The panel recommends
consideration of granulocyte infusions in select situations,
when such technology is feasible.
IV. What Is the Treatment for Chronic Disseminated (Hepatosplenic)
Candidiasis?
Recommendations
24. Initial therapy with lipid formulation AmB, 3–5 mg/kg daily
OR an echinocandin (micafungin: 100 mg daily; caspofungin:
70-mg loading dose, then 50 mg daily; or anidulafungin: 200mg loading dose, then 100 mg daily), for several weeks is recommended, followed by oral ﬂuconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg)
daily, for patients who are unlikely to have a ﬂuconazoleresistant isolate (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
25. Therapy should continue until lesions resolve on repeat
imaging, which is usually several months. Premature discontinuation of antifungal therapy can lead to relapse (strong
recommendation; low-quality evidence).
26. If chemotherapy or hematopoietic cell transplantation is
required, it should not be delayed because of the presence of
chronic disseminated candidiasis, and antifungal therapy
should be continued throughout the period of high risk to prevent relapse (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
27. For patients who have debilitating persistent fevers, short
term (1–2 weeks) treatment with nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs or corticosteroids can be considered (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
Chronic disseminated candidiasis is an uncommon syndrome seen almost entirely in patients who have hematologic
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Candidiasis • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • e21
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
malignancies and who have just recovered from neutropenia
[217–219]. Candida albicans is the species most commonly isolated, but C. tropicalis, C. glabrata, C. krusei, and other Candida
species also have been implicated. Fever, right upper quadrant
discomfort, nausea, and elevation of liver enzymes occur following return of neutrophils and persist for months unless treatment is initiated. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography
(CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission
tomography-CT (PET-CT), and sometimes ultrasound have
all been shown to be useful for diagnosis and for follow-up
[217, 218, 220, 221]. Biopsy of lesions may reveal budding yeasts
and hyphae, but organisms may not be seen on biopsy specimens and often do not grow in culture, leading some to suggest
that chronic disseminated candidiasis represents an immune reconstitution syndrome [219].
Approaches to the treatment of chronic disseminated candidiasis are based on anecdotal case reports and open-label series. Early experience with AmB was discouraging; as many as
one-third of patients died within 3 months with active infection, and the overall mortality was 74% [222]. With the use of
newer antifungal agents, mortality has decreased to 21% overall and is highly linked to relapse of leukemia [223]. Lipid formulations of AmB have proved more efﬁcacious, perhaps
related to better tissue concentrations [217, 218, 224, 225]. Fluconazole alone or following AmB induction has been shown to
be effective [226, 227]. Increasingly, patients are receiving ﬂuconazole prophylaxis, and thus have an increased risk of developing infection with a ﬂuconazole-resistant organism. In this
population, a broader-spectrum azole or an echinocandin is
more appropriate therapy. Only a few reports note experience
with voriconazole or posaconazole for this condition, but echinocandins are increasingly used to treat this infection [219,
223, 228–231].
Antifungal therapy should be given until all lesions have resolved radiographically in order to prevent relapse. MRI or
PET-CT appear to be the most sensitive follow-up modalities,
but are expensive [220, 221]; standard contrast-enhanced CT
is less expensive and is adequate for follow-up. Additional chemotherapy and hematopoietic cell transplant should be pursued
when clinically appropriate and not delayed because of candidiasis. However, antifungal therapy must be continued during the
period of immunosuppression to prevent relapse of infection
[219, 223, 228–231].
There is evidence that this syndrome could possibly be a form
of immune reconstitution and that corticosteroids or antiinﬂammatory agents might have a role in selected patients.
Several investigators have reported rapid defervescence and
improvement in liver enzyme tests when corticosteroids have
been given in conjunction with antifungal agents [219, 223,
232, 233]. The dosage of corticosteroids has generally been
0.5–1 mg/kg daily of oral prednisone. The duration of steroid
treatment, although highly variable, in most cases has been
several weeks, given as a tapering dose [232, 233]. However,
the role of corticosteroids in this disease is still not clear.
V. What Is the Role of Empiric Treatment for Suspected Invasive
Candidiasis in Nonneutropenic Patients in the Intensive Care Unit?
Recommendations
28. Empiric antifungal therapy should be considered in critically ill patients with risk factors for invasive candidiasis and
no other known cause of fever and should be based on clinical assessment of risk factors, surrogate markers for invasive
candidiasis, and/or culture data from nonsterile sites (strong
recommendation; moderate-quality evidence). Empiric antifungal therapy should be started as soon as possible in patients who have the above risk factors and who have
clinical signs of septic shock (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
29. Preferred empiric therapy for suspected candidiasis in
nonneutropenic patients in the ICU is an echinocandin (caspofungin: loading dose of 70 mg, then 50 mg daily; micafungin: 100 mg daily; anidulafungin: loading dose of 200 mg,
then 100 mg daily) (strong recommendation; moderatequality evidence).
30. Fluconazole, 800-mg (12 mg/kg) loading dose, then 400
mg (6 mg/kg) daily, is an acceptable alternative for patients
who have had no recent azole exposure and are not colonized
with azole-resistant Candida species (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
31. Lipid formulation AmB, 3–5 mg/kg daily, is an alternative
if there is intolerance to other antifungal agents (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
32. Recommended duration of empiric therapy for suspected
invasive candidiasis in those patients who improve is 2
weeks, the same as for treatment of documented candidemia
(weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
33. For patients who have no clinical response to empiric antifungal therapy at 4–5 days and who do not have subsequent
evidence of invasive candidiasis after the start of empiric
therapy or have a negative non-culture-based diagnostic
assay with a high negative predictive value, consideration
should be given to stopping antifungal therapy (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
Candida species are an increasing cause of invasive infection in
nonneutropenic patients in the ICU; half to two-thirds of all episodes of candidemia occur in an ICU [5,14,167,170,234].Candida bloodstream infections are associated with increased ICU
and hospital stay [129,235].Most estimates of attributable mortality rates for invasive candidiasis in this setting are 30%–40%
[167, 170]. In those patients who have septic shock due to Candida species and who do not have adequate source control or
antifungal therapy begun within 24 hours, the mortality approaches 100% [14]. Prompt initiation of appropriate antifungal
e22 • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • Pappas et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
therapy has been associated with as much as a 50% reduction in
mortality [14, 17, 18, 236]. Prompt and appropriate antifungal
therapy is often delayed because of the relative insensitivity of
blood cultures, the time needed for blood cultures to yield growth,
the possibility of negative blood cultures with invasive abdominal
candidiasis, and the lack of speciﬁc clinical signs and symptoms.
Strategies for initiating empiric antifungal therapy include an
evaluation of risk factors and use of surrogate markers.
Optimal utilization of risk factors and colonization status to derive clinical scoring systems and the interpretation of non-culturebased diagnostic tests to identify patients with invasive candidiasis
to initiate earlyempiric antifungal therapy have been the subjects of
many investigations. Retrospective and single-center studies have
yielded conﬂicting results, depending on unique patient populations. Well-designed prospective clinical trials in this area have
been difﬁcult to perform, and many unanswered questions remain.
Risk factors for development of invasive candidiasis include
Candida colonization, severity of illness, exposure to broadspectrum antibiotics, recent major surgery, particularly abdominal surgery, necrotizing pancreatitis, dialysis, parenteral nutrition, corticosteroids, and the use of CVCs [237, 238]. Empiric
therapy based solely on colonization with Candida species appears inadequate [16, 239]. Prospective studies evaluating the
extent of Candida colonization with scores or indices have
not been shown to change management, and they are labor intensive and expensive [234].
Several studies have looked at prediction models to identify
patients at highest risk. These studies are characterized by
high speciﬁcity, but low sensitivity, thus missing many patients
with candidiasis [240–242]. A subset of postsurgical patients,
particularly those with recurrent gastrointestinal perforation,
anastomotic leaks, or acute necrotizing pancreatitis may be at
uniquely high risk for candidiasis [238, 240, 243, 244]. The
most important combination of factors in an individual patient
has not been established.
Surrogate markers that have been evaluated in the ICU setting include β-D-glucan, mannan-antimannan antibodies, and
PCR testing. β-D-glucan appears to be more sensitive than Candida colonization scores or indices, but appears to have low positive predictive value [245–248]. False-positive results are a
problem, as noted in the Background section. The optimal timing and number of samples is unknown. In a recent prophylaxis
trial of high-risk ICU patients, β-D-glucan testing performed
twice weekly identiﬁed 87% of patients with proven candidiasis
[249]. Small studies basing preemptive therapy on β-D-glucan
testing suggest that the high negative predictive value of this
test could be useful in excluding invasive candidiasis in the
ICU setting [151, 248, 250–252].
Combined mannan-antimannan testing has variable sensitivity and speciﬁcity [142, 253]. Real-time PCR appears to
have similar sensitivity to β-D-glucan for the diagnosis of
candidemia, but may be more sensitive for the diagnosis of
other forms of invasive candidiasis [132]. Tests using magnetic biosensor technology for the rapid detection of Candida
species from whole-blood samples (T2 Biosystems) are also
promising [163]. Recommendations for the clinical use of
these tests are challenging without robust data in the at-risk
ICU population.
Limited clinical studies have evaluated the efﬁcacy of empiric
strategies. Retrospective studies indicate potential for higher
survival when empiric antifungal therapy is given to high-risk
patients [254]. Prospective clinical trials of empiric antifungal
therapy in the ICU are difﬁcult to conduct and have yielded
conﬂicting results. Selected older studies, including those in
speciﬁc patient populations, such as those with prior gastrointestinal surgery or bowel perforation, demonstrated potential
beneﬁt [255, 256]. In a randomized clinical trial of ICU patients
at risk for invasive candidiasis and with unexplained fever, empiric ﬂuconazole (800 mg daily for 14 days) was not associated
with better outcomes when compared with placebo [257]. A recent study comparing caspofungin to placebo among ICU patients with signs of infection, Candida colonization, and clinical
risk factors for invasive candidiasis was stopped prematurely
due to poor patient accrual, conﬁrming the difﬁculty in conducting these trials [249].
Widespread use of antifungal agents must be balanced
against the cost, the risk of toxicity, and the emergence of resistance. None of the existing clinical trials have been adequately
powered to assess the risk of the emergence of azole or echinocandin resistance. Empiric antifungal therapy should be considered in critically ill patients with risk factors for invasive
candidiasis and no other known cause of fever. Preference
should be given to an echinocandin in hemodynamically unstable patients, those previously exposed to an azole, and in those
colonized with azole-resistant Candida species. Fluconazole
may be considered in hemodynamically stable patients who
are colonized with azole-susceptible Candida species or who
have no prior exposure to azoles. There are no data guiding
the appropriate duration of empiric antifungal therapy among
patients who have a clinical response to therapy, but it is logical
that it should not differ from the treatment of documented candidemia. Conversely, therapy can be stopped after several days
in the absence of clinical response if cultures and surrogate
markers are negative.
VI. Should Prophylaxis Be Used to Prevent Invasive Candidiasis in the
ICU Setting?
Recommendations
34. Fluconazole, 800-mg (12 mg/kg) loading dose, then 400
mg (6 mg/kg) daily, could be used in high-risk patients in
adult ICUs with a high rate (>5%) of invasive candidiasis
(weak recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
35. An alternative is to give an echinocandin (caspofungin: 70mg loading dose, then 50 mg daily; anidulafungin: 200-mg
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Candidiasis • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • e23
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
loading dose and then 100 mg daily; or micafungin: 100 mg
daily) (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
36. Daily bathing of ICU patients with chlorhexidine, which
has been shown to decrease the incidence of bloodstream infections including candidemia, could be considered (weak
recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
Time to appropriate therapy in candidemia appears to have a signiﬁcant impact on the outcome of patients with this infection [14,
17, 18]. However, insensitivity and signiﬁcant delays using culture
techniques, as well as limitations of rapid diagnostic tests, remain
for this common cause of bloodstream infection among patients
in the ICU [258,259].A safe and effective prophylactic strategy to
prevent candidemia among high-risk patients could be of great
beneﬁt [260]. The approach to prophylaxis has been either
broad, in which all patients within the ICU setting are treated
[261, 262], or selective, in which only speciﬁc high-risk groups
of patients are targeted for prophylaxis [249, 263, 264].
For ICUs that show very high rates of invasive candidiasis, in
excess of the expected rates of <5% of patients, antifungal prophylaxis may be warranted in selected patients who are at highest risk [260]. Two randomized, placebo-controlled trials have
shown a reduction in the incidence of invasive candidiasis in
single units or single hospitals when ﬂuconazole prophylaxis
was used broadly in the ICU; one study targeted all patients
in a surgical ICU [262] and, in the other, all patients receiving
mechanical ventilation [261]. In both studies, Candida urinary
tract infections, as well as invasive candidiasis and candidemia,
were included as endpoints.
In a blinded placebo-controlled trial that enrolled a small
number of patients, ﬂuconazole prophylaxis was shown to decrease Candida intra-abdominal infections in high-risk patients
in the surgical ICU [263]. A noncomparative, open-label trial
using caspofungin prophylaxis in a small number of similar
high-risk surgical patients also showed beneﬁt [264]. A recent
multicenter placebo-controlled, blinded clinical trial of caspofungin prophylaxis targeting only those ICU patients who
met speciﬁc criteria for high risk for invasive candidiasis
showed a trend toward reduction of invasive candidiasis, but
was limited by the sample size [249].
Several meta-analyses have assessed the issue of ﬂuconazole
prophylaxis in ICU patients [265–268]. Not surprisingly, there
were methodological differences among the studies, and there
was variation among the study populations. All 4 meta-analyses
showed that ﬂuconazole prophylaxis was associated with a reduction in invasive candidiasis, but only 2 showed a reduction in
candidemia [267, 268]. Importantly, only one analysis showed a
reduction in mortality from invasive candidiasis [268]. None of
the meta-analyses assessed the issues of adverse effects of antifungal agents, the emergence of resistance to ﬂuconazole, or
major ecological shifts in Candida species, topics of great
importance in the ICU setting. A Cochrane analysis conﬁrmed
the importance of focusing prophylactic efforts on high-risk patients, noting that the number needed to treat to prevent one
case of invasive candidiasis in the ICU setting varied from 9
in high-risk patients to 188 in low-risk patients [269].
Few data exist on risk factors for candidemia in pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) patients. A population-based, casecontrol study conducted in a large tertiary care pediatric center
found an incidence of candidemia of 3.5 per 1000 PICU admissions [270]. The presence of a CVC, a diagnosis of malignancy,
and receipt of either vancomycin or an antianaerobic antimicrobial agent for >3 days were independently associated with
the development of candidemia. Children who had ≥3 of
these risk factors in different combinations had a predicted
probability of developing candidemia of between 10% and 46%.
Data are accruing on the use of skin decolonization with antiseptic agents in the ICU to decrease bloodstream infections,
including those caused by Candida species [271–274]. Several
multicenter randomized clinical trials have shown that daily
bathing of ICU patients with chlorhexidine decreases the incidence of both catheter-associated and non-catheter-associated
hospital-acquired bloodstream infections [271–273]. These
studies were aimed primarily at evaluating the impact on
multidrug-resistant bacterial infections and provide few data
on Candida infections. However, at least one of these trials
found a signiﬁcant reduction in catheter associated Candida
bloodstream infections [272]. A meta-analysis on the effects
of daily chlorhexidine bathing included 10 studies performed
in an ICU setting, only one of which was a randomized controlled trial. The conclusion was that chlorhexidine bathing reduced the incidence of bloodstream infections, including
catheter-associated bacterial infections [274]. Although not
proven to prevent candidemia, there is little risk to the use of
chlorhexidine in ICU patients, and this practice may prove
beneﬁcial.
VII. What Is the Treatment for Neonatal Candidiasis, Including Central
Nervous System Infection?
What Is the Treatment for Neonatal Invasive Candidiasis and
Candidemia?
Recommendations
37. AmB deoxycholate, 1 mg/kg daily, is recommended for neonates with disseminated candidiasis (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
38. Fluconazole, 12 mg/kg intravenous or oral daily, is a reasonable alternative in patients who have not been on ﬂuconazole prophylaxis (strong recommendation; moderate-quality
evidence).
39. Lipid formulation AmB, 3–5 mg/kg daily, is an alternative,
but should be used with caution, particularly in the presence
of urinary tract involvement (weak recommendation; lowquality evidence).
e24 • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • Pappas et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
40. Echinocandins should be used with caution and generally
limited to salvage therapy or to situations in which resistance
or toxicity preclude the use of AmB deoxycholate or ﬂuconazole (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
41. A lumbar puncture and a dilated retinal examination are
recommended in neonates with cultures positive for Candida
species from blood and/or urine (strong recommendation;
low-quality evidence).
42. CT or ultrasound imaging of the genitourinary tract, liver,
and spleen should be performed if blood cultures are persistently positive for Candida species (strong recommendation;
low-quality evidence).
43. CVC removal is strongly recommended (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
44. The recommended duration of therapy for candidemia
without obvious metastatic complications is for 2 weeks
after documented clearance of Candida species from the
bloodstream and resolution of signs attributable to candidemia (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
Neonatal candidiasis occurs predominately in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). Candida species are the third most common pathogen associated with bloodstream infection in NICUs
in the United States [275]. However, the incidence of neonatal
candidiasis has decreased dramatically over the past decade
[276–278]. Neonatal candidiasis is associated with signiﬁcant
risk of death, neurodevelopmental impairment in extremely
low-birth-weight infants who weigh ≤1000 g, and increased
healthcare costs [279–284]. The primary risk factor for neonatal
candidiasis is prematurity with those neonates who have an extremely low birth weight at greatest risk. These infants are at high
risk to have CNS involvement as a complication of candidemia
[285, 286]. Candida albicans and C. parapsilosis account for
80%–90% of neonatal invasive candidiasis [278, 287].
Neonatal candidiasis differs from invasive disease in older patients in that neonates are more likely to present with nonspeciﬁc
or subtle signs and symptoms of infection. Candida species invade virtually all tissues, including the retina, brain, heart, lung,
liver, spleen, and joints [288].Endocarditis is an uncommon complication of candidiasis in neonates. Although meningitis is seen
frequently in association with candidemia, approximately half of
neonates with Candida meningitis do not have a positive blood
culture [285]. CNS disease in the neonate typically manifests as
meningoencephalitis and should be assumed to be present in
the neonate who has candidemia and signs and symptoms suggesting meningoencephalitis, as CSF ﬁndings of Candida infection may be unreliable. Neurodevelopmental impairment is
common in survivors; therefore, careful follow-up of neurodevelopmental parameters is important [279, 281, 282, 284].
Recent studies have highlighted the signiﬁcance of candiduria
in the absence of candidemia in this population [281].
Extremely low-birth-weight infants with candiduria are at a
substantial risk of death or neurodevelopmental impairment.
Candiduria in this population should prompt an evaluation
(blood cultures, lumbar puncture, and abdominal ultrasound)
for disseminated Candida infection and warrants treatment.
The recommendation to treat neonatal candidiasis with AmB
deoxycholate or ﬂuconazole is based on small, single-center trials and 2 multicenter cohort studies [279, 289–291]. In contrast
to adults and older children, AmB deoxycholate is well tolerated
in neonates and does not seem to be associated with a high risk
for nephrotoxicity. A recent comparative effectiveness study
found that neonates treated with AmB lipid formulations had
higher mortality than infants treated with AmB deoxycholate
or ﬂuconazole [291]. The difference in outcomes seen with
lipid AmB formulations may be related to inadequate penetration of these drugs into the kidneys, inadequate dosing for premature neonates, or unknown confounders. Based on the
current evidence, ﬂuconazole and AmB deoxycholate are acceptable choices for therapy, and lipid formulations of AmB should
be used with caution. There are few data on the use of echinocandins in neonates. There are concerns with echinocandins because concentrations in the CNS and in the urinary tract are low.
Dosing of antifungal agents is substantially different for neonates than it is for older children and adults. Limited pharmacokinetic data exist regarding dosing of AmB deoxycholate in
neonates, and the pharmacokinetics appear to be highly variable in this population [96, 97, 101]. The recommended dose
of 1 mg/kg daily results in higher estimates of clearance in infants compared with older children and may partially explain
why the drug is better tolerated in neonates [98]. The duration
of therapy is based primarily on adult and pediatric data, and
there are no data to guide duration speciﬁcally in neonates.
Population pharmacokinetic studies have provided dosing information for ﬂuconazole in the neonatal population [105,292].
Based on these studies, ﬂuconazole, 12/mg/kg daily, can be used
to treat neonatal candidiasis. More recent data suggest that a
loading dose of ﬂuconazole of 25 mg/kg achieves the therapeutic target more rapidly than traditional dosing [292]. However,
further studies of this dosing scheme are required before it can
be recommended. Failure to promptly remove or replace CVCs
in infants with candidemia places the infant at increased risk of
prolonged infection, mortality, and long-term irreversible neurodevelopmental impairment [198, 279]. Removal and replacement of the catheter at an anatomically distinct site should be
performed unless contraindicated.
What Is the Treatment for Central Nervous System Infections
in Neonates?
Recommendations
45. For initial treatment, AmB deoxycholate, 1 mg/kg intravenous daily, is recommended (strong recommendation; lowquality evidence).
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Candidiasis • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • e25
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
46. An alternative regimen is liposomal AmB, 5 mg/kg daily
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
47. The addition of ﬂucytosine, 25 mg/kg 4 times daily, may be
considered as salvage therapy in patients who have not had a
clinical response to initial AmB therapy, but adverse effects
are frequent (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
48. For step-down treatment after the patient has responded to
initial treatment, ﬂuconazole, 12 mg/kg daily, is recommended for isolates that are susceptible to ﬂuconazole (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
49. Therapy should continue until all signs, symptoms, and
CSF and radiological abnormalities, if present, have resolved
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
50. Infected CNS devices, including ventriculostomy drains
and shunts, should be removed if at all possible (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
There are limited data to guide therapy for CNS Candida infections in the neonate. All AmB preparations, including the lipid
formulations, penetrate the CNS and have fungicidal activity in
the CNS [44]. AmB deoxycholate and liposomal AmB were
found to have greater antifungal efﬁcacy when studied in a rabbit model of Candida meningoencephalitis compared with the
other formulations [44]. The clinician must weigh the beneﬁts
and drawbacks of using liposomal AmB with its good CSF penetration but poor urine levels vs using AmB deoxycholate with
less good CSF levels but better urine levels.
The beneﬁt of adding ﬂucytosine for neonates with CNS candidiasis is uncertain. In the largest prospective study evaluating
treatment outcomes of CNS candidiasis in neonates, the median
time to clear CSF was longer for those who received ﬂucytosine
plus AmB deoxycholate (17.5 days; 6 infants), compared with
those who received only AmB deoxycholate (6 days; 18 infants)
[279]. In addition, ﬂucytosine is poorly tolerated, and gastrointestinal side effects may hinder oral feeding in neonates. In general, ﬂucytosine is used only in neonates who have not
responded to AmB alone.
Data supporting the use of echinocandins in neonates are
emerging; however, several key issues require further clariﬁcation. The optimal dose of echinocandins in neonates remains
uncertain [109, 284, 293–297]. Furthermore, there are concerns
regarding the penetration of echinocandins into the CSF. Echinocandins appear to penetrate brain tissue, but not the CSF, and
achieve concentrations in brain shown to be effective in animal
models when dosages higher than those recommended for humans have been used [298, 299]. Limited clinical data suggest
that the echinocandins may be effective for the treatment of
CNS infections in neonates, but are not adequate to recommend
their use at this time [293].
What Are the Recommendations for Prophylaxis in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit Setting?
Recommendations
51. In nurseries with high rates (>10%) of invasive candidiasis, intravenous or oral ﬂuconazole prophylaxis, 3–6 mg/kg
twice weekly for 6 weeks, in neonates with birth weights
<1000 g is recommended (strong recommendation; highquality evidence).
52. Oral nystatin, 100 000 units 3 times daily for 6 weeks, is an
alternative to ﬂuconazole in neonates with birth weights
<1500 g in situations in which availability or resistance preclude the use of ﬂuconazole (weak recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
53. Oral bovine lactoferrin (100 mg/day) may be effective in
neonates <1500 g but is not currently available in US hospitals (weak recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
Numerous studies examining ﬂuconazole prophylaxis for the
prevention of invasive candidiasis in neonates have consistently
demonstrated efﬁcacy and possibly reduced mortality [300–
310]. Fluconazole, 3 mg/kg or 6 mg/kg twice weekly, signiﬁcantly reduced rates of invasive candidiasis in premature
neonates weighing <1000 g in nurseries with a very high incidence of Candida infections [300, 302]. A 2007 Cochrane
review of clinical trials of ﬂuconazole prophylaxis demonstrated efﬁcacy, with a typical relative risk of 0.23 and number
needed to treat of 9. The number needed to treat varied substantially depending on the incidence of invasive candidiasis
in a particular ICU. The majority of studies have demonstrated
the safety of ﬂuconazole prophylaxis and lack of emergence of
resistance.
Enteral or orally administered nystatin has been shown to be
effective in reducing invasive candidiasis in preterm infants
[303, 311–313]. In one study, nystatin prophylaxis was also associated with a reduction in all-cause mortality [313]. However,
there remains a paucity of data on nystatin prophylaxis in infants <750 grams (the group at highest risk), and nystatin
may not always be able to be administered when there is an
ileus, gastrointestinal disease, feeding intolerance, or hemodynamic instability. These clinical situations are very common
in low-gestational-age premature infants and limit the broad
applicability of nystatin prophylaxis as a preventive strategy.
Lactoferrin is a mammalian milk glycoprotein involved in innate immunity. In a randomized trial of bovine lactoferrin in
infants <1500 g, the incidence of late-onset sepsis was signiﬁcantly lower in the lactoferrin group than in the placebo
group [314]. A secondary analysis of the clinical trial showed
that lactoferrin also reduced the incidence of invasive fungal infections compared with placebo [314]. Further conﬁrmation of
the efﬁcacy and safety of oral bovine lactoferrin for the prevention of invasive candidiasis is needed, especially in infants <750
g, because there were only a few neonates in this category in this
trial.
e26 • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • Pappas et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
VIII. What Is the Treatment for Intra-abdominal Candidiasis?
Recommendations
54. Empiric antifungal therapy should be considered for patients with clinical evidence of intra-abdominal infection
and signiﬁcant risk factors for candidiasis, including recent
abdominal surgery, anastomotic leaks, or necrotizing pancreatitis (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
55. Treatment of intra-abdominal candidiasis should include
source control, with appropriate drainage and/or debridement (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
56. The choice of antifungal therapy is the same as for the
treatment of candidemia or empiric therapy for nonneutropenic patients in the ICU (See sections I and V) (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
57. The duration of therapy should be determined by adequacy
of source control and clinical response (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
Intra-abdominal candidiasis in patients who have had recent
abdominal surgery or intra-abdominal events refers to a heterogeneous group of infections that includes peritonitis, abdominal
abscess, and purulent or necrotic infection at sites of gastrointestinal perforation or anastomotic leak. Up to 40% of patients
with secondary or tertiary peritonitis, as deﬁned by a multinational consensus panel, may develop intra-abdominal candidiasis with a high mortality rate [243, 244, 315, 316]. A subset of
postsurgical patients, particularly those with recurrent gastroduodenal perforation, anastomotic leaks, or acute necrotizing
pancreatitis, are at uniquely high risk for invasive candidiasis
[243, 244, 263, 316–320]. In other settings, such as perforated
appendicitis, invasive candidiasis appears to be a rare complication [316, 319]. Infections are often polymicrobial, with yeast
noted in as high as 20% of all cases and 40% in patients with
a recent gastroduodenal perforation [319, 320].
Diagnosis is hampered by the lack of speciﬁc clinical signs and
symptoms. Blood cultures are often negative [321]. A laboratory
report of yeast isolated from an abdominal specimen must be
evaluated to distinguish between contamination, colonization,
and invasive infection. Swabs of superﬁcial wounds and specimens taken from intra-abdominal catheters that have been in
place for >24 hours do not provide useful information and
should not be performed. In contrast, the presence of yeast obtained from normally sterile intra-abdominal specimens (operative room specimens, and/or drains that have been placed within
24 hours) in patients with clinical evidence for infection should
be considered indicative of intra-abdominal candidiasis.
The role of surrogate markers and Candida risk scores in this
setting has not been established. There are limited data on the
utility of using β-D-glucan in postsurgical patients with suspected intra-abdominal candidiasis. In one study, β-D-glucan had a
72% positive predictive value and an 80% negative predictive
value for distinguishing colonization from intra-abdominal invasive candidiasis and performed better than Candida colonization scores or indices [143].
Clinical evidence for the use of antifungal therapy for patients with suspected intra-abdominal invasive candidiasis is
limited. Most studies are small, uncontrolled, single-center, or
performed in speciﬁc populations. Patients who have Candida
species isolated from normally sterile abdominal cultures or
drains placed within 24 hours and who have clinical evidence
of infection should be treated for intra-abdominal candidiasis.
Patients who have had gastroduodenal perforations, anastomotic leaks, necrotizing pancreatitis, or other intra-abdominal
events without the isolation of Candida species and who are
doing poorly despite treatment for bacterial infections may beneﬁt from empiric antifungal therapy. Several meta-analyses of
antifungal prophylaxis in high-risk surgical ICU patients have
yielded conﬂicting results [265–268].
Source control with adequate drainage and/or debridement is
an important part of therapy of intra-abdominal candidiasis
[14]. The choice of antifungal agent should be guided by the
Candida species isolated and knowledge of the local epidemiology, including antifungal susceptibility patterns. Duration of
antifungal therapy should be guided by clinical response and
the adequacy of source control.
IX. Does the Isolation of Candida Species From the Respiratory Tract
Require Antifungal Therapy?
Recommendation
58. Growth of Candida from respiratory secretions usually
indicates colonization and rarely requires treatment with antifungal therapy (strong recommendation; moderate-quality
evidence).
Evidence Summary
The isolation of Candida species from the respiratory tract is
commonly encountered among patients who are in the ICU
and are intubated or have a chronic tracheostomy. This almost
always reﬂects colonization of the airways and not infection.
Candida pneumonia and lung abscess are very uncommon
[322, 323]. Only rarely after aspiration of oropharyngeal material has primary Candida pneumonia or abscess been documented [324, 325]. Pneumonia due to Candida species is
generally limited to severely immunocompromised patients
who develop infection following hematogenous spread to the
lungs. CT scan of the thorax usually shows multiple pulmonary
nodules. Isolation of Candida species from respiratory samples
in a patient who is severely immunosuppressed should trigger a
search for evidence of invasive candidiasis.
Although the diagnosis of Candida pneumonia is supported
by isolation of the organism from a bronchoalveolar lavage
(BAL) specimen, a ﬁrm diagnosis requires histopathological evidence of invasive disease. Multiple prospective and retrospective
autopsy studies consistently demonstrate the poor predictive
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Candidiasis • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • e27
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
value of the growth of Candida from respiratory secretions, including BAL ﬂuid [326–328]. In one prospective study, none of
77 patients who died in an ICU and who had clinical and radiologic evidence of pneumonia and a positive culture for Candida
species from BAL or sputum demonstrated evidence of Candida
pneumonia at autopsy [328]. Because of the rarity of Candida
pneumonia, the extremely common ﬁnding of Candida in respiratory secretions, and the lack of speciﬁcity of this ﬁnding [329–
331],a decision to initiate antifungal therapy should not be made
on the basis of respiratory tract culture results alone.
Recent observations suggest that colonization of the airway
with Candida species is associated with the development of bacterial colonization and pneumonia [332–336]. Candida airway
colonization was also associated with worse clinical outcomes
and higher mortality in these studies. However, it is not clear
if Candida airway colonization has a causal relationship to
poorer outcomes or is simply a marker of disease severity.
X. What Is the Treatment for Candida Intravascular Infections, Including
Endocarditis and Infections of Implantable Cardiac Devices?
What Is the Treatment for Candida Endocarditis?
Recommendations
59. For native valve endocarditis, lipid formulation AmB, 3–5
mg/kg daily, with or without ﬂucytosine, 25 mg/kg 4 times
daily, OR high-dose echinocandin (caspofungin 150 mg daily,
micafungin 150 mg daily, or anidulafungin 200 mg daily) is
recommended for initial therapy (strong recommendation;
low-quality evidence).
60. Step-down therapy to ﬂuconazole, 400–800 mg (6–12 mg/
kg) daily, is recommended for patients who have ﬂuconazole-susceptible Candida isolates, have demonstrated clinical
stability, and have cleared Candida from the bloodstream
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
61. Oral voriconazole, 200–300 mg (3–4 mg/kg) twice daily, or
posaconazole tablets, 300 mg daily, can be used as step-down
therapy for isolates that are susceptible to those agents but
not susceptible to ﬂuconazole (weak recommendation; very
low-quality evidence).
62. Valve replacement is recommended; treatment should continue for at least 6 weeks after surgery and for a longer duration
in patients with perivalvular abscesses and other complications
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
63. For patients who cannot undergo valve replacement, longterm suppression with ﬂuconazole, 400–800 mg (6–12 mg/
kg) daily, if the isolate is susceptible, is recommended (strong
recommendation; low-quality evidence).
64. For prosthetic valve endocarditis, the same antifungal regimens suggested for native valve endocarditis are recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Chronic suppressive antifungal therapy with ﬂuconazole,
400–800 mg (6–12 mg/kg) daily, is recommended to prevent
recurrence (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
The incidence of Candida endocarditis has increased concurrent
with the general increase in Candida infections [337]. Endocarditis should be suspected when blood cultures are persistently positive, when a patient with candidemia has persistent fever despite
appropriate treatment, or when a new heart murmur, heart failure, or embolic phenomena occur in the setting of candidemia
[338]. Most cases occur following cardiac valvular surgery, but
other risk factors include injection drug use, cancer chemotherapy, prolonged presence of CVCs, and prior bacterial endocarditis.
The signs, symptoms, and complications are generally similar to
those of bacterial endocarditis, except for the frequent occurrence
of large emboli to major vessels. Cases are fairly evenly divided
between C. albicans and non-albicans Candida species [339].
Medical therapy of Candida endocarditis has occasionally
been curative [340–348], but the optimum therapy for both native and prosthetic valve endocarditis in adults is a combination
of valve replacement and a long course of antifungal therapy
based on case reports, case series, cohort studies, a metaanalysis, and clinical experience [339, 349]. Valve repair and vegetectomy are alternatives to valve replacement. Most of the
cases reported in the literature have been treated with AmB deoxycholate, with or without ﬂucytosine [339, 342, 349–355].
Fluconazole monotherapy is associated with an unacceptably
high rate of relapse and mortality [354]. However, ﬂuconazole
is useful for step-down therapy.
AmB deoxycholate and azoles have decreased activity when
compared with echinocandins against bioﬁlms formed by Candida in vitro, and they penetrate poorly into vegetations. Echinocandins and lipid formulations of AmB demonstrate more potent
activity against Candida bioﬁlms [356]. A prospective, openlabel clinical trial, cohort studies, and several case reports show
a role for the echinocandins in the treatment of endocarditis
[228, 346, 348, 357–365]. Higher dosages of the echinocandins
are thought to be necessary to treat endocarditis [228, 365]. Caspofungin has been used as monotherapy and in combination with
AmB, azoles, or ﬂucytosine in single case reports, but data are limited for the other echinocandins [346, 360, 361, 363, 365, 366].
Lifelong suppressive therapy with ﬂuconazole has been used
successfully after a course of primary therapy in patients for
whom cardiac surgery is contraindicated; it has also been advocated to prevent late recurrence of Candida prosthetic valve endocarditis [360, 367, 368]. Because Candida endocarditis has a
propensity to relapse months to years later, follow-up should be
maintained for several years after treatment [350, 351].
What Is the Treatment for Candida Infection of Implantable
Cardiac Devices?
Recommendations
65. For pacemaker and implantable cardiac deﬁbrillator infections, the entire device should be removed (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
e28 • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • Pappas et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
66. Antifungal therapy is the same as that recommended for
native valve endocarditis (strong recommendation; lowquality evidence).
67. For infections limited to generator pockets, 4 weeks of antifungal therapy after removal of the device is recommended
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
68. For infections involving the wires, at least 6 weeks of antifungal therapy after wire removal is recommended (strong
recommendation; low-quality evidence).
69. For ventricular assist devices that cannot be removed, the
antifungal regimen is the same as that recommended for native valve endocarditis (strong recommendation; low-quality
evidence). Chronic suppressive therapy with ﬂuconazole, if
the isolate is susceptible, for as long as the device remains in
place is recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
Evidence Summary
There are a few case reports and a single retrospective review of
Candida infections of pacemakers and cardiac deﬁbrillators
[369–374]. The entire device should be removed and antifungal
therapy given for 4–6 weeks depending on whether the infection involves the wires in addition to the generator pocket
[369, 371–374]. Medical therapy alone has failed [370].
There are isolated case reports and a few case series on Candida infections of ventricular assist devices [375–378]. The Expert Panel believes that suppressive azole therapy after a full
course of initial antifungal therapy is warranted. Many of
these devices cannot be removed and suppression will be lifelong. The role of antifungal prophylaxis to prevent infection
in all patients receiving an assist device remains controversial
[378].
What
Is
the
Treatment
for
Candida
Suppurative
Thrombophlebitis?
Recommendations
70. Catheter removal and incision and drainage or resection of
the vein, if feasible, is recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
71. Lipid formulation AmB, 3–5 mg/kg daily, OR ﬂuconazole,
400–800 mg (6–12 mg/kg) daily, OR an echinocandin (caspofungin 150 mg daily, micafungin 150 mg daily, or anidulafungin 200 mg daily) for at least 2 weeks after candidemia
(if present) has cleared is recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
72. Step-down therapy to ﬂuconazole, 400–800 mg (6–12 mg/
kg) daily, should be considered for patients who have initially
responded to AmB or an echinocandin, are clinically stable,
and have a ﬂuconazole-susceptible isolate (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
73. Resolution of the thrombus can be used as evidence to discontinue antifungal therapy if clinical and culture data are
supportive (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
Most experience treating suppurative thrombophlebitis has
been with AmB deoxycholate. Fluconazole and caspofungin
have also been successful in some cases [379–381], but other
agents used for primary treatment of candidemia, including
echinocandins and voriconazole, should be effective [382].
Higher-than-usual doses of echinocandins should be used, similar to therapy for endocarditis.
Surgical excision of the vein plays an important role in the
treatment of peripheral-vein Candida thrombophlebitis. When
a central vein is involved, surgery is usually not an option. In
some cases, systemic anticoagulation or thrombolytic therapy
has been used as adjunctive therapy, but there are insufﬁcient
data to recommend their use. Thrombolytic therapy, in conjunction with antifungal therapy, has been used successfully
in the management of an infected thrombus attached to a
CVC in a patient with persistent candidemia [381].
XI. What Is the Treatment for Candida Osteoarticular Infections?
What Is the Treatment for Candida Osteomyelitis?
Recommendations
74. Fluconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg) daily, for 6–12 months OR
an echinocandin (caspofungin 50–70 mg daily, micafungin
100 mg daily, or anidulafungin 100 mg daily) for at least 2
weeks followed by ﬂuconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg) daily, for
6–12 months is recommended (strong recommendation;
low-quality evidence).
75. Lipid formulation AmB, 3–5 mg/kg daily, for at least 2
weeks followed by ﬂuconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg) daily, for
6–12 months is a less attractive alternative (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
76. Surgical debridement is recommended in selected cases
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
Most patients with osteomyelitis present with a subacute to
chronic course [383,384].The most common mechanism of infection is hematogenous dissemination, but direct inoculation
and contiguous spread of infection also occur. Involvement of
2 or more bones is common, and therefore, when a single focus
of infection is identiﬁed, there should be a search for other sites
of involvement. The axial skeleton, especially the spine, is the
most common site of involvement in adults; in children, the
long bones are more commonly involved [228, 384–388]. Neither the clinical picture nor the ﬁndings on radiographic imaging are speciﬁc for Candida infection. Candida albicans remains
the dominant pathogen. However, 2 retrospective reviews of a
large number of cases found that non-albicans Candida were
an increasingly frequent cause of Candida osteomyelitis and
mixed infections with bacteria, especially Staphylococcus aureus, were not uncommon, underscoring the need for biopsy and
culture [384, 389].
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Candidiasis • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • e29
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
Treatment recommendations are based on case reports and
case series. Historically, AmB deoxycholate has been the most
commonly used agent [388]. Recent literature favors the use
of ﬂuconazole or an echinocandin over AmB [228, 384–386].
Fluconazole has been used successfully as initial therapy
for patients who have susceptible isolates, but treatment
failures have also been reported [390–393]. There are case
reports of the successful treatment of osteomyelitis with
itraconazole, voriconazole, posaconazole, and caspofungin
[228, 229, 394–396].
Cure rates appear to be signiﬁcantly higher when an antifungal agent is administered for at least 6 months [384, 385]. The
addition of AmB deoxycholate or ﬂuconazole to bone cement
has been suggested to be of value as adjunctive therapy in complicated cases and appears to be safe, but this practice is controversial [397, 398].
Surgical debridement is frequently performed in conjunction
with antifungal therapy. Some reports have found surgical therapy important for Candida vertebral osteomyelitis [387], but
others have not found that to be the case [388]. Surgery is indicated in patients who have neurological deﬁcits, spinal instability, large abscesses, or persistent or worsening symptoms during
therapy [384].
On the basis of a small number of cases, Candida mediastinitis and sternal osteomyelitis in patients who have undergone
sternotomy can be treated successfully with surgical debridement followed by either AmB or ﬂuconazole [391, 399]. Irrigation of the mediastinal space with AmB is not recommended,
because it can cause irritation. Antifungal therapy of several
months’ duration, similar to that needed for osteomyelitis at
other sites, is appropriate.
What Is the Treatment for Candida Septic Arthritis?
77. Fluconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg) daily, for 6 weeks OR an
echinocandin (caspofungin 50–70 mg daily, micafungin
100 mg daily, or anidulafungin 100 mg daily) for 2 weeks
followed by ﬂuconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg) daily, for at least
4 weeks is recommended (strong recommendation; lowquality evidence).
78. Lipid formulation AmB, 3–5 mg/kg daily, for 2 weeks, followed by ﬂuconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg) daily, for at least 4
weeks is a less attractive alternative (weak recommendation;
low-quality evidence).
79. Surgical drainage is indicated in all cases of septic arthritis
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
80. For septic arthritis involving a prosthetic device, device removal is recommended (strong recommendation; moderatequality evidence).
81. If the prosthetic device cannot be removed, chronic suppression with ﬂuconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg) daily, if the isolate is susceptible, is recommended (strong recommendation;
low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
Adequate drainage is critical to successful therapy of Candida arthritis. In particular, Candida arthritis of the hip requires open
surgical drainage. Case reports have documented cures with
AmB, ﬂuconazole, and caspofungin therapy in combination
with adequate drainage [400–402]. Administration of either
AmB or ﬂuconazole produces substantial synovial ﬂuid levels, so
that intra-articular injection of antifungal agents is not necessary.
Candida prosthetic joint infection generally requires resection arthroplasty, although success with medical therapy alone
has been described rarely [403, 404]. The combination of removal and reimplantation of the prosthesis in 2 stages separated
by 3–6 months and a prolonged period of antifungal therapy for
at least 12 weeks after the resection arthroplasty and at least 6
weeks after prosthesis implantation is suggested on the basis
of limited data [405–407]. The efﬁcacy of antifungal-loaded cement spacers is controversial [408]. If the prosthetic device cannot be removed, chronic suppression with an antifungal agent,
usually ﬂuconazole, is necessary.
XII. What Is the Treatment for Candida Endophthalmitis?
What Is the General Approach to Candida Endophthalmitis?
Recommendations
82. All patients with candidemia should have a dilated retinal
examination, preferably performed by an ophthalmologist,
within the ﬁrst week of therapy in nonneutropenic patients
to establish if endophthalmitis is present (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence). For neutropenic patients, it is
recommended to delay the examination until neutrophil recovery (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
83. The extent of ocular infection (chorioretinitis with or without macular involvement and with or without vitritis) should
be determined by an ophthalmologist (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
84. Decisions regarding antifungal treatment and surgical intervention should be made jointly by an ophthalmologist and
an infectious diseases physician (strong recommendation;
low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
Endophthalmitis refers to infections within the eye, usually involving the posterior chamber and sometimes also the anterior
chamber. Candida endophthalmitis can be exogenous, initially
affecting the anterior chamber and occurring following trauma
or a surgical procedure. More often, Candida species cause endogenous infection in which the organism reaches the posterior
chamber of the eye via hematogenous spread. Endogenous infections can be manifested as isolated chorioretinitis or as chorioretinitis with extension into the vitreous, leading to vitritis
[409–412]. Candida albicans is the species most commonly responsible for endogenous endophthalmitis, but all Candida
species that cause candidemia have been reported to cause
e30 • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • Pappas et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
this complication [411–414].Outcomes in terms of visual acuity
depend on the extent of visual loss at the time of presentation
and macular involvement [415].
Several basic principles are important in the approach to treatment of Candida infections of the eye. It should ﬁrst be determined whether infection involves the anterior and/or posterior
segment of the eye and whether the macula or vitreous are involved [70, 416–418]. Achieving adequate concentrations of the
appropriate antifungal agent in the area of the eye that is infected
is crucial to success [419, 420]. Infections involving the chorioretinal layer are more easily treated because this area of the posterior chamber is highly vascular; many systemic antifungal agents
likely reach adequate concentrations within the choroid and the
retina [420–422]. The antifungal susceptibilities of the infecting
species are important. Species that are susceptible to ﬂuconazole
or voriconazole are more easily treated because these agents
achieve adequate concentrations in the posterior segment of
the eye, including the vitreous [419, 420, 422]. Treatment must
be systemic to treat candidemia and other organ involvement,
if present, in addition to the ocular infection.
Sight-threatening lesions near the macula or invasion into the
vitreous usually necessitate intravitreal injection of antifungal
agents, usually AmB deoxycholate or voriconazole, with or without vitrectomy, in addition to systemic antifungal agents [412,
419, 422–425]. The ophthalmologist plays a key role in following
the course of endogenous Candida endophthalmitis, deciding
when and if to perform intravitreal injections and vitrectomy.
The approach to the patient who has candidemia has
evolved over time, and standard practice now includes consultation with an ophthalmologist to do a dilated retinal examination. The basis for the recommendation to perform an
ophthalmological evaluation is not a result of randomized
controlled trials showing the beneﬁts of such an assessment,
but rather clinical judgment that the result of missing and
not appropriately treating Candida endophthalmitis could
be of great consequence to the patient. The issue of whether
an ophthalmological examination of all candidemic patients
is cost-effective has been raised [183, 426]. The members of
the Expert Panel believe that the risk of missing Candida endophthalmitis outweighs the cost of obtaining an ophthalmological examination. We are concerned about the greater risk
of loss of visual acuity in patients who are examined only after
manifesting ocular symptoms [415], and note that other centers report higher rates of endophthalmitis than reports from
the centers cited by those who question the routine use of ocular examination [417, 418, 421].
What Is the Treatment for Candida Chorioretinitis Without
Vitritis?
Recommendations
85. For ﬂuconazole-/voriconazole-susceptible isolates, ﬂuconazole, loading dose, 800 mg (12 mg/kg), then 400–800 mg
(6–12 mg/kg) daily OR voriconazole, loading dose 400 mg
(6 mg/kg) intravenous twice daily for 2 doses, then 300 mg
(4 mg/kg) intravenous or oral twice daily is recommended
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
86. For ﬂuconazole-/voriconazole-resistant isolates, liposomal
AmB, 3–5 mg/kg intravenous daily, with or without oral ﬂucytosine, 25 mg/kg 4 times daily is recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
87. With macular involvement, antifungal agents as noted
above PLUS intravitreal injection of either AmB deoxycholate, 5–10 µg/0.1 mL sterile water, or voriconazole, 100 µg/
0.1 mL sterile water or normal saline, to ensure a prompt
high level of antifungal activity is recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
88. The duration of treatment should be at least 4–6 weeks,
with the ﬁnal duration depending on resolution of the
lesions as determined by repeated ophthalmological examinations (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
The greatest clinical experience for treatment of Candida endophthalmitis has been with intravenous AmB deoxycholate,
only because it has been available for the longest time. However,
this agent does not achieve adequate concentrations in the posterior chamber [419, 420, 427, 428]. In animal experiments in
inﬂamed eyes, liposomal AmB achieved higher concentrations
in the eye than either AmB deoxycholate or AmB lipid complex
[427]. A few patients have been treated successfully with lipid
formulations of AmB, but concentrations in the vitreous in humans have not been reported [429].
Flucytosine provides adjunctive synergistic activity when
used with AmB; it should not be used as monotherapy because
of development of resistance and reports of decreased efﬁcacy in
animal models [428]. It attains excellent levels in the ocular
compartments, including the vitreous [412, 430]. Toxicity is
common, and ﬂucytosine serum levels must be monitored
weekly to prevent dose-related toxicity.
Fluconazole is frequently used for the treatment of Candida
endophthalmitis. In experimental animals, this agent achieves
excellent concentrations throughout the eye, including the vitreous [428]. In humans, concentrations in the vitreous are approximately 70% of those in the serum [57]. Clinical and
microbiological response rates in animals with experimental infection are somewhat conﬂicting, with most reports showing efﬁcacy of ﬂuconazole, but some noting better efﬁcacy with AmB
than ﬂuconazole [428, 431, 432]. Early reports in humans noted
the efﬁcacy of ﬂuconazole, but some patients had received intravitreal injection of antifungal agents, as well as systemic ﬂuconazole [433, 434]. Despite the fact that no large published series
has deﬁned the efﬁcacy of ﬂuconazole therapy, this agent is routinely used for the treatment of Candida endophthalmitis [410,
411, 415, 421].
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Candidiasis • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • e31
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
Voriconazole has played an increasing role in the treatment
of endophthalmitis [419]. Concentrations in the vitreous in humans are approximately 40% of serum concentrations; the drug
is relatively safe, and, like ﬂuconazole, can be given by the oral
or intravenous route [435–438]. It is more active than ﬂuconazole against C. glabrata, although resistance is increasing and
may preclude its use for some patients; it is uniformly active
against C. krusei. Efﬁcacy of voriconazole in treating Candida
endophthalmitis has been documented, but not compared
with ﬂuconazole [429,436,438].Serum and (presumably) intraocular concentrations of voriconazole are quite variable, and
serum trough levels should be routinely monitored to achieve
concentrations between 2 µg/mL and 5 µg/mL to enhance efﬁcacy and avoid toxicity [118].
There are few data regarding the use of posaconazole for
Candida endophthalmitis. Intraocular penetration is poor,
this agent has been used in very few patients, and it is not approved for the treatment of candidemia [419].
Echinocandins are ﬁrst-line agents for the treatment of candidemia. Whether they can effectively treat chorioretinitis without vitreal involvement cannot be answered with the data
available. Penetration of all echinocandins into the different
chambers of the eye is poor, and is especially poor in the vitreous [412, 419, 420]. When levels have been achieved in experimental animal models and in one study in humans with
micafungin, the dosages needed have been higher than those
currently licensed for use [112, 439–443]. Only a few case reports of the use of an echinocandin as monotherapy have
been published, and the results are contradictory [444, 445].
With the availability of other agents that achieve adequate concentrations in the vitreous, there is little reason to recommend
the use of echinocandins for Candida endophthalmitis.
Because involvement of the macula is sight-threatening and
concentrations of antifungal agents in the posterior chamber do
not immediately reach therapeutic levels, many ophthalmologists
perform an intravitreal injection of either AmB deoxycholate or
voriconazole to quickly achieve high antifungal activity in the posterior chamber. AmB is the agent that has been used most often
for intravitreal injection [422, 423]. A dosage of 5–10 µg given in
0.1 mL sterile water is generally safe [419]. Intravitreal injection of
lipid formulations of AmB has been compared with AmB deoxycholate in rabbits; all formulations showed toxicity at higher doses,
but at 10 µg, the least toxic was liposomal AmB [446], conﬁrming
a prior study using a noncommercial liposomal formulation [447].
Voriconazole is increasingly used for intravitreal injection for
both Candida and mold endophthalmitis [438, 448]. It has been
shown to be safe in animal eyes at concentrations <250 µg/mL
[449]. The usual dose given to humans is 100 µg in 0.1 mL sterile water or normal saline (achieving a ﬁnal concentration of 25
µg/mL) [419, 438]. In vitrectomized eyes, the half-life of both
AmB and voriconazole is shortened, and repeated injections
may be required [450, 451].
What Is the Treatment for Candida Chorioretinitis With
Vitritis?
Recommendations
89. Antifungal therapy as detailed above for chorioretinitis
without vitritis, PLUS intravitreal injection of either amphotericin B deoxycholate, 5–10 µg/0.1 mL sterile water, or
voriconazole, 100 µg/0.1 mL sterile water or normal saline,
is recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
90. Vitrectomy should be considered to decrease the burden of
organisms and to allow the removal of fungal abscesses that
are inaccessible to systemic antifungal agents (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
91. The duration of treatment should be at least 4–6 weeks,
with the ﬁnal duration dependent on resolution of the lesions
as determined by repeated ophthalmological examinations
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
Candida endophthalmitis that has extended into the vitreous
results in worse visual outcomes than chorioretinitis without
vitritis [415]. This may be related to the inability of many antifungal agents to achieve adequate concentrations in the vitreous
body. Poor outcomes could also be due to an increased burden
of organisms in the posterior chamber or the existence of an abscess that cannot be visualized through the vitreal haziness. Additionally, in cases of endophthalmitis in which fungemia is not
documented and the organism is unknown, vitrectomy provides material for culture that is superior to needle aspiration
and allows the proper antifungal agent to be used [422, 424].
The treatment when vitritis is documented is similar to that
recommended for chorioretinitis without vitreal involvement,
with the added recommendations to (1) inject either AmB deoxycholate or voriconazole into the vitreous to achieve high
drug concentrations in the posterior chamber and to (2) consider performing a pars plana vitrectomy. Several small series have
noted success in patients in whom early pars plana vitrectomy
was accomplished [415, 423, 424, 452]. Removal of the vitreous
is usually accompanied by intravitreal injection of antifungal
agents, and as noted above, the half-life of injected antifungal
agents is shortened with vitrectomy [450, 451]. The risk of retinal detachment, a severe late complication of endophthalmitis
with vitreal involvement, is decreased with early vitrectomy
[412, 415]. To have the best outcomes, Candida endophthalmitis with vitritis must be managed with close cooperation between ophthalmologists and infectious diseases specialists.
XIII. What Is the Treatment for Central Nervous System Candidiasis?
Recommendations
92. For initial treatment, liposomal AmB, 5 mg/kg daily,
with or without oral ﬂucytosine, 25 mg/kg 4 times daily,
is recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
e32 • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • Pappas et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
93. For step-down therapy after the patient has responded to initial treatment, ﬂuconazole, 400–800 mg (6–12 mg/kg) daily, is
recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
94. Therapy should continue until all signs and symptoms and
CSF and radiological abnormalities have resolved (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
95. Infected CNS devices, including ventriculostomy drains,
shunts, stimulators, prosthetic reconstructive devices, and biopolymer wafers that deliver chemotherapy, should be removed
if possible (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
96. For patients in whom a ventricular device cannot be removed, AmB deoxycholate could be administered through
the device into the ventricle at a dosage ranging from 0.01
mg to 0.5 mg in 2 mL 5% dextrose in water (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
CNS Candida infections can occur as a manifestation of disseminated candidiasis, as a complication of a neurosurgical procedure, especially when an intracranial device is inserted, or rarely
as an isolated chronic infection [453–462]. Meningitis is the
most common presentation, but multiple small abscesses
throughout the brain parenchyma, large solitary brain abscesses, and epidural abscesses have been reported [462]. Low-birthweight neonates are at high risk to have CNS infection as a
complication of candidemia; neonatal CNS candidiasis is dealt
with in the section on neonatal Candida infections. Most infections are due to C. albicans, with few reports of C. glabrata and
other species causing infection [453–457, 459, 461, 462]. Treatment is based on the antifungal susceptibilities of the infecting
species and the ability of the antifungal agent to achieve appropriate concentrations in the CSF and brain.
No randomized controlled trials have been performed to evaluate the most appropriate treatment for these uncommon infections. Single cases and small series are reported. Most experience
has accrued with the use of AmB deoxycholate, with or without
ﬂucytosine [453–455, 457, 459, 460, 462]. Liposomal AmB (AmBisome) has been found to attain higher levels in the brain than
amphotericin B lipid complex (ABLC) or AmB deoxycholate in a
rabbit model of Candida meningoencephalitis [44].
The combination of AmB and ﬂucytosine is recommended
because of the in vitro synergism noted with the combination
and the excellent CSF concentrations achieved by ﬂucytosine.
However, ﬂucytosine’s toxic effects on bone marrow and liver
must be carefully monitored, preferably with frequent serum
ﬂucytosine levels. The optimal length of therapy with AmB
alone or in combination with ﬂucytosine has not been studied.
Several weeks of therapy are suggested before transitioning to
oral azole therapy.
Fluconazole achieves excellent levels in CSF and brain tissue
and has proved useful as step-down therapy [453,454,459].Fluconazole also has been used as monotherapy; both success and
failure have been noted, and for this reason it is not recommended as ﬁrst-line therapy [453, 454, 463–465]. Fluconazole
combined with ﬂucytosine has been reported to cure Candida
meningitis in a few patients [459], and this is a possible regimen
for step-down therapy. There are no reports of the use of voriconazole or posaconazole for CNS candidiasis. Voriconazole
achieves excellent levels in CSF, and should be considered
for the rare case of C. glabrata that is not voriconazole
resistant or C. krusei meningitis after initial treatment with
AmB with or without ﬂucytosine. Posaconazole does not
reach adequate concentrations in the CSF, and this agent is
not recommended.
Echinocandins have been used infrequently for CNS candidiasis. There are case reports noting success [466],but CNS breakthrough infections in patients receiving an echinocandin for
candidemia have been reported [467]. There are experimental
animal data noting that anidulafungin and micafungin can successfully treat C. albicans meningitis, but the doses required in
humans are much higher than currently recommended for candidemia [296, 299]. At present, echinocandins are not recommended for CNS candidiasis.
Infected CNS devices should be removed to eradicate Candida. Most experience has been with external ventricular drains
and ventriculoperitoneal shunts that have become infected
with Candida species [460, 463]. In recent years, infected devices include deep brain stimulators and Gliadel biopolymer wafers that have been placed into the site of a brain tumor to
deliver chemotherapy locally. Although difﬁcult to remove, experience has shown that these devices must be taken out for
cure of the infection [456, 468, 469].
Intraventricular administration of antifungal agents is not usually necessary for treatment of CNS Candida infections. In patients in whom the removal of a ventricular shunt or external
ventriculostomy drain is too risky because of signiﬁcantly elevated
intracranial pressure, or among patients who have not responded
to systemic antifungal therapy, intraventricular AmB deoxycholate
has proved useful [453, 454, 460, 463, 469]. The dose of intraventricular AmB deoxycholate is not standardized, and recommendations vary from 0.01 mg to 1 mg in 2 mL of 5% dextrose in water
daily [455,463,466,469].Toxicity—mainly headache, nausea, and
vomiting—is a limiting factor when administering AmB by this
route [454, 463].
XIV. What Is the Treatment for Urinary Tract Infections Due to Candida
Species?
What Is the Treatment for Asymptomatic Candiduria?
Recommendations
97. Elimination of predisposing factors, such as indwelling
bladder catheters, is recommended whenever feasible (strong
recommendation; low-quality evidence).
98. Treatment with antifungal agents is NOT recommended
unless the patient belongs to a group at high risk for
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Candidiasis • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • e33
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
dissemination; high-risk patients include neutropenic patients, very low-birth-weight infants (<1500 g), and patients
who will undergo urologic manipulation (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
99. Neutropenic patients and very low-birth-weight infants
should be treated as recommended for candidemia (see sections III and VII) (strong recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
100. Patients undergoing urologic procedures should be treated
with oral ﬂuconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg) daily, OR AmB deoxycholate, 0.3–0.6 mg/kg daily, for several days before and after
the procedure (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
The presence of candiduria is the usual trigger for a physician to
consider whether a patient has a urinary tract infection due to
Candida species. The patients at most risk for candiduria are
those who are elderly, female, diabetic, have indwelling urinary
devices, are taking antibiotics, and have had prior surgical procedures [470–475]. In the asymptomatic patient, candiduria almost always represents colonization, and elimination of
underlying risk factors, such as indwelling catheters, is often adequate to eradicate candiduria [471].
Multiple studies have noted that candiduria does not commonly lead to candidemia [471, 472, 476–480]. Several of
these studies have shown that candiduria is a marker for greater
mortality, but death is not related to Candida infection and
treatment for Candida infection does not change mortality
rates [476, 480, 481]. A prospective study in renal transplant recipients found that although mortality was higher in patients
who had candiduria, treatment did not improve outcomes, suggesting again that candiduria is a marker for severity of underlying illness [482].
Several conditions require an aggressive approach to candiduria in asymptomatic patients. These include neonates with
very low birth weight, who are at risk for invasive candidiasis
that often involves the urinary tract [281, 483]. Many physicians who care for neutropenic patients treat those who have
fever and candiduria because the candiduria may indicate invasive candidiasis. However, a recent study from a cancer hospital of a small number of patients, 25% of whom were
neutropenic, found that these patients did not develop candidemia or other complications of candiduria [484]. Several reports have documented a high rate of candidemia when
patients undergo urinary tract instrumentation [485, 486],
which has led to recommendations to treat with antifungal
agents periprocedure.
What Is the Treatment for Symptomatic Candida Cystitis?
Recommendations
101. For ﬂuconazole-susceptible organisms, oral ﬂuconazole,
200 mg (3 mg/kg) daily for 2 weeks is recommended (strong
recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
102. For ﬂuconazole-resistant C. glabrata, AmB deoxycholate,
0.3–0.6 mg/kg daily for 1–7 days OR oral ﬂucytosine, 25 mg/
kg 4 times daily for 7–10 days is recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
103. For C. krusei, AmB deoxycholate, 0.3–0.6 mg/kg daily, for
1–7 days is recommended (strong recommendation; lowquality evidence).
104. Removal of an indwelling bladder catheter, if feasible, is
strongly recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
105.
AmB
deoxycholate
bladder
irrigation,
50 mg/L
sterile water daily for 5 days, may be useful for treatment
of cystitis due to ﬂuconazole-resistant species, such as C.
glabrata and C. krusei (weak recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
What Is the Treatment for Symptomatic Ascending Candida
Pyelonephritis?
Recommendations
106. For ﬂuconazole-susceptible organisms, oral ﬂuconazole,
200–400 mg (3–6 mg/kg) daily for 2 weeks, is recommended
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
107. For ﬂuconazole-resistant C. glabrata, AmB deoxycholate,
0.3–0.6 mg/kg daily for 1–7 days, with or without oral ﬂucytosine, 25 mg/kg 4 times daily, is recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
108. For ﬂuconazole-resistant C. glabrata, monotherapy with
oral ﬂucytosine, 25 mg/kg 4 times daily for 2 weeks, could
be considered (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
109. For C. krusei, AmB deoxycholate, 0.3–0.6 mg/kg daily, for
1–7 days is recommended (strong recommendation; lowquality evidence).
110. Elimination of urinary tract obstruction is strongly recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
111. For patients who have nephrostomy tubes or stents in
place, consider removal or replacement, if feasible (weak recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
Candida UTI can develop by 2 different routes [487]. Most
symptomatic UTIs evolve as an ascending infection beginning
in the lower urinary tract, similar to the pathogenesis of bacterial UTI. Patients with ascending infection can have symptoms
of cystitis or pyelonephritis. The other route of infection occurs
as a consequence of hematogenous spread to the kidneys in a
patient who has candidemia. These patients usually have no urinary tract symptoms or signs, and are treated for candidemia.
Diagnostic tests on urine often are not helpful in differentiating colonization from infection or in pinpointing the involved
site within the urinary tract [488, 489]. For example, pyuria in a
patient with an indwelling bladder catheter cannot differentiate
Candida infection from colonization. Similarly, the colony
e34 • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • Pappas et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
count in the urine, especially when a catheter is present, cannot
be used to deﬁne infection [488, 489]. Imaging of the urinary
tract by ultrasound or CT scanning is helpful in deﬁning structural abnormalities, hydronephrosis, abscesses, emphysematous
pyelonephritis, and fungus ball formation [490–492]. Aggregation of mycelia and yeasts (fungus balls) in bladder or kidney
leads to obstruction and precludes successful treatment of infection with antifungal agents alone [94]. Rarely, Candida species
cause localized infections in prostate, epididymis, or testicles
[491, 493–495].
Several basic principles are important in the approach to
treatment of Candida UTI. The ability of the antifungal agent
to achieve adequate concentrations in the urine is as important
as the antifungal susceptibilities of the infecting species [94].
Candida albicans, the most common cause of fungal UTI, is relatively easy to treat because it is susceptible to ﬂuconazole,
which achieves high concentrations in the urine. In contrast,
UTIs due to ﬂuconazole-resistant C. glabrata and C. krusei
can be extremely difﬁcult to treat.
Fluconazole is the drug of choice for treating Candida UTI. It
was shown to be effective in eradicating candiduria in the only
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial that has
been conducted in patients with candiduria [496]. It is important to note that the patients in this trial were asymptomatic or
had minimal symptoms of cystitis. Fluconazole is available as an
oral formulation, is excreted into the urine in its active form,
and easily achieves urine levels exceeding the MIC for most
Candida isolates [94].
Flucytosine demonstrates good activity against many Candida species, with the exception of C. krusei, and is excreted as
active drug in the urine [94]. Treatment with ﬂucytosine is limited by its toxicity and the development of resistance when it is
used as a single agent.
AmB deoxycholate is active against most Candida species (although some C. krusei isolates are resistant) and achieves concentrations in the urine that exceed the MICs for most isolates,
and even low doses have been shown to be effective in treating
Candida UTI [497]. The major drawbacks are the need for intravenous administration and toxicity. The lipid formulations of
AmB appear to not achieve urine concentrations that are adequate to treat UTI and should not be used [498].
All other antifungal drugs, including the other azole agents
and echinocandins, have minimal excretion of active drug
into the urine and generally are ineffective in treating Candida
UTI [94]. However, there are several reports of patients in
whom echinocandins were used, primarily because of UTI
due to ﬂuconazole-resistant organisms, and both success and
failure were reported [499–502]. Infection localized to the kidney, as occurs with hematogenous spread, probably can be
treated with echinocandins because tissue concentrations are
adequate even though these agents do not achieve adequate
urine concentrations [499].
Irrigation of the bladder with AmB deoxycholate resolves candiduria in 80%–90% of patients, as shown in several open-label
trials, but in those studies, recurrent candiduria within several
weeks was very common [503–505]. This approach is useful
only for bladder infections and generally is discouraged, especially
in patients who would not require an indwelling catheter for any
other reason [94,506, 507].Cystitis due to C. glabrata or C. krusei
can sometimes be treated with amphotericin B bladder irrigation
and endoscopic removal of any obstructing lesions [94].
What Is the Treatment for Candida Urinary Tract Infection
Associated With Fungus Balls?
Recommendations
112. Surgical intervention is strongly recommended in adults
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
113. Antifungal treatment as noted above for cystitis or pyelonephritis is recommended (strong recommendation; lowquality evidence).
114. Irrigation through nephrostomy tubes, if present, with
AmB deoxycholate, 25–50 mg in 200–500 mL sterile water,
is recommended (strong recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
Evidence Summary
Fungus balls are an uncommon complication of Candida UTI
except in neonates, in whom fungus ball formation in the collecting system commonly occurs as a manifestation of disseminated candidiasis [483]. In adults, surgical or endoscopic
removal of the obstructing mycelial mass is central to successful
treatment [94, 508, 509]. In neonates, some series documented
resolution of fungus balls with antifungal treatment alone [510],
but others found that endoscopic removal was necessary [511,
512].There are anecdotal reports of a variety of techniques used
to remove fungus balls from the renal pelvis; these include endoscopic removal via a percutaneous nephrostomy tube, infusion of streptokinase locally, and irrigation with antifungal
agents through a nephrostomy tube [511–513]. Fungus balls
in the bladder and lower ureter usually can be removed endoscopically [509].
XV. What Is the Treatment for Vulvovaginal Candidiasis?
Recommendations
115. For the treatment of uncomplicated Candida vulvovaginitis, topical antifungal agents, with no one agent superior to
another, are recommended (strong recommendation; highquality evidence).
116. Alternatively, for the treatment of uncomplicated Candida vulvovaginitis, a single 150-mg oral dose of ﬂuconazole is
recommended
(strong
recommendation;
high-quality
evidence).
117. For severe acute Candida vulvovaginitis, ﬂuconazole 150
mg, given every 72 hours for a total of 2 or 3 doses, is recommended (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Candidiasis • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • e35
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
118. For C. glabrata vulvovaginitis that is unresponsive to oral
azoles, topical intravaginal boric acid, administered in a gelatin capsule, 600 mg daily, for 14 days is an alternative
(strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
119. Another alternative agent for C. glabrata infection is nystatin intravaginal suppositories, 100 000 units daily for 14
days (strong recommendation; low-quality evidence).
120. A third option for C. glabrata infection is topical 17% ﬂucytosine cream alone or in combination with 3% AmB cream
administered daily for 14 days (weak recommendation; lowquality evidence).
121. For recurring vulvovaginal candidiasis, 10–14 days of
induction therapy with a topical agent or oral ﬂuconazole, followed by ﬂuconazole, 150 mg weekly for 6 months, is recommended (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
Vulvovaginal candidiasis can be classiﬁed as either uncomplicated, which is present in about 90% of cases, or complicated,
which accounts for only about 10% of cases, on the basis of clinical presentation, microbiological ﬁndings, host factors, and response to therapy [514]. Complicated vulvovaginal candidiasis
is deﬁned as severe or recurrent disease, infection due to nonalbicans species, and/or infection in an abnormal host. Candida
albicans is the usual pathogen, but other Candida species can
also cause this infection.
A diagnosis of vulvovaginal candidiasis can usually be made
clinically when a woman presents with symptoms of pruritus,
irritation, vaginal soreness, external dysuria, and dyspareunia,
often accompanied by a change in vaginal discharge. Signs include vulvar edema, erythema, excoriation, ﬁssures, and a white,
thick, curdlike vaginal discharge. Unfortunately, these symptoms and signs are nonspeciﬁc and can be the result of a variety
of infectious and noninfectious etiologies. Before proceeding
with empiric antifungal therapy, the diagnosis should be conﬁrmed by a wet-mount preparation with use of saline and
10% potassium hydroxide to demonstrate the presence of
yeast or hyphae and a normal pH (4.0–4.5). For those with negative ﬁndings, vaginal cultures for Candida should be obtained.
A variety of topical and systemic oral agents are available for
treatment of vulvovaginal candidiasis. No evidence exists to
show the superiority of any one topical regimen [515, 516],
and oral and topical antifungal formulations have been shown
to achieve entirely equivalent results [517]. Uncomplicated infection can be effectively treated with either single-dose ﬂuconazole or short-course ﬂuconazole for 3 days, both of which
achieve >90% response [517, 518]. Treatment of vulvovaginal
candidiasis should not differ on the basis of human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) infection status; identical response rates are
anticipated for HIV-positive and HIV-negative women.
Complicated vulvovaginal candidiasis requires that therapy
be administered intravaginally with topical agents for 5–7
days or orally with ﬂuconazole 150 mg every 72 hours for 3
doses [54, 514]. Most Candida species, with the exception of
C. krusei and C. glabrata, respond to oral ﬂuconazole. Candida
krusei responds to all topical antifungal agents. However, treatment of C. glabrata vulvovaginal candidiasis is problematic
[514, 516]. The most important decision to make is whether
the presence of C. glabrata in vaginal cultures reﬂects colonization in a patient who has another disease, or whether it indicates
true infection requiring treatment. Azole therapy, including
voriconazole, is frequently unsuccessful [519]. A variety of
local regimens have sometimes proved effective. These include
boric acid contained in gelatin capsules and nystatin intravaginal suppositories [520]. Topical 17% ﬂucytosine cream can be
used alone or in combination with 3% AmB cream in recalcitrant cases [520, 521]. These topical formulations, as well as
boric acid gelatin capsules, must be compounded by a pharmacist
for speciﬁc patient use. Azole-resistant C. albicans infections are
extremely rare. However, recent evidence has emerged documenting ﬂuconazole and azole class resistance in women following prolonged azole exposure [522].
Recurrent vulvovaginal candidiasis, deﬁned as ≥4 episodes of
symptomatic infection within one year, is usually caused by
azole-susceptible C. albicans [514, 523]. Contributing factors,
such as diabetes, are rarely found. Treatment should begin
with induction therapy with a topical agent or oral ﬂuconazole
for 10–14 days, followed by a maintenance azole regimen for at
least 6 months [523–525]. The most convenient and welltolerated regimen is 150 mg ﬂuconazole once weekly. This regimen achieves control of symptoms in >90% of patients [523].
After cessation of maintenance therapy, a 40%–50% recurrence
rate can be anticipated. If ﬂuconazole therapy is not feasible,
topical clotrimazole cream, 200 mg twice weekly, clotrimazole
vaginal suppository 500 mg once weekly, or other intermittent
oral or topical antifungal treatment is recommended [526, 527].
XVI. What Is the Treatment for Oropharyngeal Candidiasis?
Recommendations
122. For mild disease, clotrimazole troches, 10 mg 5 times
daily, OR miconazole mucoadhesive buccal 50 mg tablet applied to the mucosal surface over the canine fossa once daily
for 7–14 days, are recommended (strong recommendation;
high-quality evidence).
123. Alternatives for mild disease include nystatin suspension
(100 000 U/mL) 4–6 mL 4 times daily, OR 1–2 nystatin pastilles (200 000 U each) 4 times daily, for 7–14 days (strong
recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
124. For moderate to severe disease, oral ﬂuconazole, 100–200
mg daily, for 7–14 days is recommended (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
125. For ﬂuconazole-refractory disease, itraconazole solution,
200 mg once daily OR posaconazole suspension, 400 mg
twice daily for 3 days then 400 mg daily, for up to 28 days,
e36 • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • Pappas et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
are recommended (strong recommendation; moderate-quality
evidence).
126. Alternatives for ﬂuconazole-refractory disease include
voriconazole, 200 mg twice daily, OR AmB deoxycholate
oral suspension, 100 mg/mL 4 times daily (strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
127. Intravenous echinocandin (caspofungin: 70-mg loading
dose, then 50 mg daily; micafungin: 100 mg daily; or anidulafungin: 200-mg loading dose, then 100 mg daily) OR intravenous AmB deoxycholate, 0.3 mg/kg daily, are other
alternatives for refractory disease (weak recommendation;
moderate-quality evidence).
128. Chronic suppressive therapy is usually unnecessary. If required for patients who have recurrent infection, ﬂuconazole,
100 mg 3 times weekly, is recommended (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
129. For HIV-infected patients, antiretroviral therapy is
strongly recommended to reduce the incidence of recurrent
infections (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
130. For denture-related candidiasis, disinfection of the denture, in addition to antifungal therapy, is recommended
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
Oropharyngeal and esophageal candidiasis occur in association
with HIV infection, diabetes, leukemia and other malignancies,
steroid use, radiation therapy, antimicrobial therapy, and denture use [528, 529], and their occurrence is recognized as an indicator of immune dysfunction. In HIV-infected patients,
oropharyngeal candidiasis is most often observed in patients
with CD4 counts <200 cells/µL [528–530]. The advent of effective antiretroviral therapy has led to a dramatic decline in the
prevalence of oropharyngeal candidiasis and a marked diminution in cases of refractory disease [531].
Fluconazole or multiazole resistance is predominantly the
consequence of previous repeated and long-term exposure to
ﬂuconazole or other azoles [530–533]. Especially in patients
with advanced immunosuppression and low CD4 counts, C. albicans resistance has been described, as has gradual emergence
of non-albicans Candida species, particularly C. glabrata, as a
cause of refractory mucosal candidiasis [532, 533].
Most cases of oropharyngeal candidiasis are caused by C. albicans, either alone or in mixed infections. Symptomatic infections caused by C. glabrata, C. dubliniensis, and C. krusei alone
have been described [532–534]. Multiple randomized prospective studies of oropharyngeal candidiasis have been performed
involving patients with AIDS and patients with cancer. Most
patients will respond initially to topical therapy [532, 535,
536]. In HIV-infected patients, symptomatic relapses occur
sooner and more frequently with topical therapy than with ﬂuconazole [535].In a multicenter randomized study among HIVinfected individuals, 50-mg mucoadhesive buccal tablets of
miconazole applied once daily to the mucosal surface over the
canine fossa were as effective as 10-mg clotrimazole troches
used 5 times daily [537].
Fluconazole tablets and itraconazole solution are superior to
ketoconazole and itraconazole capsules [538–540]. Local effects
of oral solutions may be as important as the systemic effects.
Posaconazole suspension is also as efﬁcacious as ﬂuconazole
in patients with AIDS [541]. Posaconazole, 100-mg delayed release tablets, given as 300 mg daily as a single dose, are FDA approved for the prophylaxis of fungal infections in high-risk
patients. The tablets provide a stable bioavailability (approximately 55%), once-daily dosing, and the convenience of less
stringent food requirements for absorption. This formulation
has not been fully evaluated for mucosal candidiasis, but, with
further study, could replace the oral suspension for this purpose.
Recurrent infections typically occur in patients who have persistent immunosuppression, especially those who have AIDS
and low CD4 cell counts (<50 cells/µL) [530–533]. Long-term
suppressive therapy with ﬂuconazole has been shown to be effective in the prevention of oropharyngeal candidiasis [53, 542,
543]. In a large multicenter study of HIV-infected patients,
long-term suppressive therapy with ﬂuconazole was compared
with the episodic use of ﬂuconazole in response to symptomatic
disease. Continuous suppressive therapy reduced the relapse
rate more effectively than did intermittent therapy, but was associated with increased in vitro resistance. The frequency of refractory disease was the same for both groups [53]. Oral AmB
deoxycholate, nystatin solution, and itraconazole capsules are
less effective than ﬂuconazole in preventing oropharyngeal candidiasis [544, 545].
Fluconazole-refractory infections should be treated initially
with itraconazole solution; between 64% and 80% of patients
will respond to this therapy [546, 547]. Posaconazole suspension
is efﬁcacious in approximately 75% of patients with refractory
oropharyngeal or esophageal candidiasis [548], and voriconazole
also is efﬁcacious for ﬂuconazole-refractory infections [549]. Intravenous caspofungin, micafungin, and anidulafungin have been
shown to be effective alternatives to azole agents for refractory
candidiasis [24, 87, 88, 550].Oral or intravenous AmB deoxycholate is also effective in some patients; however, a pharmacist must
compound the oral formulation [551]. Immunomodulation with
adjunctive granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor or
interferon-γ have been occasionally used in the management of
refractory oral and esophageal candidiasis [552, 553].
Decreasing rates of oral carriage of Candida species and a reduced frequency of symptomatic oropharyngeal candidiasis are
seen among HIV-infected patients on effective antiretroviral
therapy [554]. Thus, antiretroviral therapy should be used
whenever possible for HIV-infected patients with oropharyngeal or esophageal candidiasis.
Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis is a rare condition that
is characterized by chronic, persistent onychomycosis and/or
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Candidiasis • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • e37
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
mucocutaneous lesions due to Candida species. Some patients
have a thymoma or autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1 [555]. Fluconazole should be used as initial therapy for candidiasis in these patients. Response to antifungal
therapy may be delayed when there is extensive skin or nail involvement. Because of the intrinsic immunodeﬁciency, most
patients require chronic suppressive antifungal therapy and frequently develop azole-refractory infections [556]. Patients with
ﬂuconazole-refractory Candida infections should be treated the
same as patients with AIDS who develop azole refractory infections [528].
XVII. What Is the Treatment for Esophageal Candidiasis?
Recommendations
131. Systemic antifungal therapy is always required. A diagnostic trial of antifungal therapy is appropriate before
performing an endoscopic examination (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
132. Oral ﬂuconazole, 200–400 mg (3–6 mg/kg) daily, for 14–
21 days is recommended (strong recommendation; highquality evidence).
133. For patients who cannot tolerate oral therapy, intravenous
ﬂuconazole, 400 mg (6 mg/kg) daily, OR an echinocandin
(micafungin: 150 mg daily; caspofungin: 70-mg loading
dose, then 50 mg daily; or anidulafungin: 200 mg daily) is
recommended
(strong
recommendation;
high-quality
evidence).
134. A less preferred alternative for those who cannot tolerate
oral therapy is AmB deoxycholate, 0.3–0.7 mg/kg daily
(strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
135. Consider de-escalating to oral therapy with ﬂuconazole
200–400 mg (3–6 mg/kg) daily once the patient is able to tolerate oral intake (strong recommendation; moderate-quality
evidence).
136. For ﬂuconazole-refractory disease, itraconazole solution,
200 mg daily, OR voriconazole, 200 mg (3 mg/kg) twice
daily either intravenous or oral, for 14–21 days is recommended (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
137. Alternatives for ﬂuconazole-refractory disease include an
echinocandin (micafungin: 150 mg daily; caspofungin: 70mg loading dose, then 50 mg daily; or anidulafungin: 200
mg daily) for 14–21 days, OR AmB deoxycholate, 0.3–0.7
mg/kg daily, for 21 days (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
138. Posaconazole suspension, 400 mg twice daily, or extended-release tablets, 300 mg once daily, could be considered for
ﬂuconazole-refractory disease (weak recommendation; lowquality evidence).
139. For patients who have recurrent esophagitis, chronic suppressive therapy with ﬂuconazole, 100–200 mg 3 times weekly, is recommended (strong recommendation; high-quality
evidence).
140. For HIV-infected patients, antiretroviral therapy is
strongly recommended to reduce the incidence of recurrent
infections (strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
Esophageal candidiasis typically occurs at lower CD4 counts
than oropharyngeal disease [528–530]. The advent of effective
antiretroviral therapy has led to a dramatic decline in the prevalence of esophageal candidiasis and a marked diminution in
cases of refractory disease [531]. Most cases of esophageal
candidiasis are caused by C. albicans. However, symptomatic
infections caused by C. glabrata, C. dubliniensis, and C. krusei
have been described [534].
The presence of oropharyngeal candidiasis and dysphagia or
odynophagia in an immunocompromised host is frequently
predictive of esophageal candidiasis, although esophageal candidiasis can present as odynophagia without concomitant oropharyngeal candidiasis. A therapeutic trial with ﬂuconazole
for patients with presumed esophageal candidiasis is a costeffective alternative to endoscopic examination. In general,
most patients with esophageal candidiasis will have improvement or resolution of their symptoms within 7 days after the
initiation of antifungal therapy [557].
Fluconazole is superior to ketoconazole, itraconazole capsules, and ﬂucytosine, and is comparable to itraconazole solution for the treatment of esophageal candidiasis [558, 559]; up
to 80% of patients with ﬂuconazole-refractory infections will respond to itraconazole solution [547]. Voriconazole is as efﬁcacious as ﬂuconazole and has shown success in the treatment of
ﬂuconazole-refractory mucosal candidiasis [63, 549].
The echinocandins are as effective as ﬂuconazole but are associated with higher relapse rates than those observed with ﬂuconazole [24, 87, 88, 550]. Thus, higher doses of echinocandins
are recommended for use for esophageal disease than are used
for candidemia to decrease relapses. Higher doses have been
studied for micafungin [560]. Fluconazole-refractory disease responds to caspofungin, and it is likely that micafungin and anidulafungin are as effective as caspofungin. In patients with
advanced AIDS, recurrent infections are common, and longterm suppressive therapy with ﬂuconazole is effective in decreasing the recurrence rates [53]. The use of effective antiretroviral therapy has dramatically decreased the incidence of
esophageal candidiasis in HIV-infected patients.
Notes
Acknowledgments.
The Expert Panel expresses its gratitude for
thoughtful reviews of an earlier version by Anna Thorner and Pranatharthi
Chandrasekar; and David van Duin as liaison of the IDSA Standards and
Practice Guidelines Committee (SPGC). The panel also greatly appreciates
the work of Charles B. Wessels and Michele Klein Fedyshin of the Health
Sciences Library System of the University of Pittsburgh for the development
and execution of the systematic literature searches for this guideline.
Financial support.
Support for this guideline was provided by the Infectious Diseases Society of America.
e38 • CID 2016:62 (15 February) • Pappas et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/62/4/e1/2462830
by guest
on 11 August 2018
Potential conﬂicts of interest.
The following list is a reﬂection of what
has been reported to IDSA. To provide thorough transparency, IDSA requires full disclosure of all relationships, regardless of relevancy to the guideline topic. Evaluation of such relationships as potential conﬂicts of interest
(COI) is determined by a review process that includes assessment by the
SPGC Chair, the SPGC liaison to the development panel, and the Board
of Directors liaison to the SPGC and, if necessary, the COI Task Force of
the Board. This assessment of disclosed relationships for possible COI
will be based on the relative weight of the ﬁnancial relationship (ie, monetary amount) and the relevance of the relationship (ie, the degree to which
an association might reasonably be interpreted by an independent observer
as related to the topic or recommendation of consideration). The reader of
these guidelines should be mindful of this when the list of disclosures is reviewed. For activities outside of the submitted work, P. G. P. served as a consultant to Merck, Astellas (past), Gilead, T2 Biosystems, Scynexis, Viamet,
IMMY Diagnostics, and Pﬁzer (past) and has received research grants from
T2 Biosystems, Gilead, Merck, Astellas, Scynexis, and IMMY. For activities
outside of the submitted work, C. A. K. has received research grants from VA
Cooperative Studies, Merck, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) and The National Institute on Aging (all past), and has received royalties from UpToDate. For activities outside of the submitted work,
D. A. has served a consultant to Merck, Astellas, Pﬁzer, Seachaid, Mayne,
Roche, Theravance, Viamet, and Scynexis and has received research grants
from Merck, Pﬁzer, MSG, Actellion, Theravance, Scynexis, and Astellas. For
activities outside of the submitted work, C. J. C. has consulted for Merck, and
received research grants from Pﬁzer, Merck, Astellas, CSL Behring, and T2
Diagnostics. For activities outside of the submitted work, K. A. M. has received research grants from Pﬁzer, Astellas, Merck, and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and served as a consultant for Astellas, Chimerix,
Cidara, Genentech, Merck, Revolution Medicines, and Theravance. She
has a licensed patent to MycoMed Technologies. For activities outside of
the submitted work, L. O.-Z. has served as a consultant to Viracor (past),
Novadigm (past), Pﬁzer (past), Astellas, Cidara, Scynexis, and Merck and
has received research grants from Merck (past), Astellas, Pﬁzer (past), Immunetics, Associates of Cape Cod (past), and T2 Biosystems, and has been
on the speakers’ bureau for Merck and Pﬁzer. For activities outside of the
submitted work, A. C. R. has received research grants from Merck and T2
Biosystems, and royalties from UpToDate. For activities outside of the submitted work, J. A. V. has served as a consultant for Astellas, Forest, served on
promotional speakers’ bureau for Astellas, Pﬁzer, Forest, and Astra Zeneca,
and has received research grants from Astellas, Pﬁzer, Merck, MSG, T2 Biosystems, and NIH/National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research.
For activities outside of the submitted work, T. J. W. has served as a consultant for Astellas, Drais (past), Novartis, Pﬁzer, Methylgene, SigmaTau,
Merck, ContraFect Trius, and has received research grants from SOS Kids
Foundation, Sharpe Family Foundation, Astellas, Cubist, Theravance, Medicines Company, Actavis, Pﬁzer, Merck, Novartis, ContraFect, and The
Schueler Foundation. For activities outside of the submitted work, T. E. Z.
has served as a consultant for Astellas, Pﬁzer, Merck, and Cubist (all past)
and has received research grants from Merck (past), Cubist (past), Agency
for Health Research and Quality, CDC, NIH, and the Thrasher Foundation.
All other authors report no potential conﬂicts. All authors have submitted
the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest. Conﬂicts
that the editors consider relevant to the content of the manuscript have been
disclosed.
