110
West African Journal of Radiology  ♦  Vol. 22, Issue 2, July-December 2015
patients with esophagitis complicating gastro‑esophageal 
reflux disease (GERD).[4]
Case Report
A 74‑year‑old woman presented with 1‑year history of 
recurrent total dysphagia, which was sudden in onset and 
episodic. There was no history of ingestion of a corrosive 
substance, esophageal instrumentation, GERD or fever. 
There was no odynophagia. There was no history of 
chest pain, regurgitation, any underlying malignancy or 
immunosuppression. Furthermore, there was no positive 
history of radiation therapy or chemotherapy in the past. She 
had significant weight loss and she was a known hypertensive 
on medication. The physical examination was essentially 
normal and a clinical assessment of dysphagia secondary to 
diffuse esophageal spasm was made.
There was no abnormality detected on chest radiograph. The 
single contrast barium swallow study showed narrowing of 
about 10 cm segment in the middle third of the esophagus 
commencing at 20 cm from incisors teeth with contrast filled 
fine out‑pouches giving a “feathery” appearance [Figure 1]. 
There was no hold‑up or reflux of contrast on fluoroscopy. 
There was no diffuse discrete mucosal plaques, cobblestone, 
Introduction
Candida albicans is the most common cause of infectious 
esophagitis.[1] It usually occurs as an opportunistic infection 
in immunocompromised patients.[2]
The characteristic appearance of Candida esophagitis on 
barium studies is that of diffuse discrete mucosal plaques, 
which may become confluent to form cobblestone or shaggy 
esophagus.[1‑3] Several authors have reported uncommon 
manifestations which include foamy appearance, aphthous 
ulceration, stricture, fistula, and polypoid masses.[2,3]
The “feathery” appearance is described in this case as a new 
manifestation of Candida esophagitis. This appearance is 
similar to what was described as pseudo‑diverticulosis in 
Candida Esophagitis: Feathery Appearance as a New 
Sign on Barium Esophagogram
Olusola AM Adesiyun, Peter Oladapo Adeoye1, Chima Kingsley Pascal Ofoegbu1, Abayomi Fadeyi2, 
Olalekan Ibukun Oyinloye, Mutiu Oladapo Atobatele
Departments of Radiology and 2Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, College of Health Sciences, University of Ilorin Teaching 
Hospital, University of Ilorin, 1Department of Surgery, Division of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, College of Health Sciences, 
University of Ilorin Teaching Hospital, University of Ilorin, Ilorin, Nigeria
Correspondence: Dr. Mutiu Oladapo Atobatele, Department of Radiology, University of Ilorin Teaching Hospital, University of Ilorin, PMB 1459,
Ilorin, Nigeria. E‑mail: atobas13@yahoo.com
Access this article online
Quick Response Code:
Website:
www.wajradiology.org
DOI:
10.4103/1115-3474.162152
The characteristic appearance of Candida esophagitis on barium studies is that of diffuse discrete mucosal plaques, which may become 
confluent to form 'cobblestone or shaggy' esophagus. Many authors have also reported different radiographic findings such as a foamy 
appearance in florid esophageal candidiasis in immunocompromised patients. This report discusses a “feathery” appearance seen 
in barium esophagography of a 74‑year‑old woman who presented with dysphagia. The barium swallow showed fine out- pouching 
giving a “feathery” appearance, which is similar to what is described as pseudo‑diverticulosis in patients with esophagitis complicating 
gastro‑esophageal reflux disease. A diagnosis of esophagitis presumably due to candidiasis was made. This was confirmed by fungal 
studies on biopsy specimen following flexible esophagoscopy. Radiologists should be aware of this rare manifestation as a new sign 
of Candida esophagitis in order to avoid unnecessary delay in diagnosis and treatment.
Key words: Barium esophagogram; Candida esophagitis; feathery
CASE REPORT
ABSTRACT
Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/wajr by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AW
nYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8KKGKV0Ymy+78= on 01/14/2025
Adesiyun, et al.: Candida esophagitis
111
West African Journal of Radiology  ♦  Vol. 22, Issue 2, July-December 2015
foamy or shaggy appearance of the esophagus. Chest 
computerized tomography scan showed thickened esophageal 
wall limited to the involved segment. A  diagnosis of 
esophagitis was made based on the “feathery” appearance 
on barium swallow studies.
Flexible esophagoscopy showed whitish patches in the middle 
third of the esophagus that bled on contact [Figure 2]. The 
underlying mucosa was friable and erythematous. There was no 
mass lesion seen and the probe was advanced to the stomach. 
Samples obtained from the esophagus were taken and sent for 
histology and fungal studies, which revealed chronic esophagitis 
and C. albicans respectively. Lentiviral screening was negative.
The patient was commenced on oral fluconazole because 
amphotericin B was not available. She tolerated semi‑solid 
food about 2 weeks after the commencement of the therapy 
and normal diet a month after.
Discussion
Candida colonization of the esophagus occurs in 25.0% of 
healthy individuals.[5] However, invasive Candida esophageal 
infections predominantly occur in immunocompromised and 
transplant patients or after a major surgical procedure.[5]
During the past two decades, a much more fulminant form 
of candidiasis has been encountered in patients with AIDS, 
who may present with grossly irregular or “shaggy” esophagus 
caused by innumerable coalescent pseudomembranes and 
plaques, with trapping of barium between the lesions.[1]
Although, a “shaggy” barium‑filled esophagus with ragged 
irregular contour is thought to be characteristic of candidiasis, 
this finding is present only in patients with advanced 
disease.[6] Other radiographic finding which may be seen 
in more advanced disease is coalescent plaques, which may 
produce a “cobblestone” or “snakeskin” appearance.[2,7]
In our case, the patient was not immunocompromised 
as evidenced by the negative HIV screening and had no 
previous instrumentation or surgical intervention. The 
“feathery” appearance described, in this case, was seen in an 
immunocompetent patient. This may explain why the disease 
condition did not progress to the advanced stage 1‑year after 
the commencement of the symptoms.
The pathophysiology that accounts for this pseudodiverticulosis (feathery appearance) is unclear. This may 
be due to inflammatory changes induced by the Candida 
infection. Its specificity for Candida esophagitis has not been 
established. However, if found the patient must be further 
evaluated for Candida esophagitis. Endoscopy with sampling 
for cytological/microbiological evaluation is however, the 
conclusive way to establish the diagnosis.[7]
Sam et al. described a foamy esophagus as a new sign of 
Candida esophagitis on double contrast esophagography 
which is characterized by innumerable tiny, rounded 
bubbles that settle out along the top of the barium column, 
producing a layer of foam.[2] It was inferred that this foamy 
esophagus may be more likely to occur in patients with chronic 
esophageal candidiasis from esophageal stasis associated 
with scleroderma or other causes of functional or mechanical 
obstruction of the esophagus. Feathery appearance seen 
in this case is a new sign of chronic Candida esophagitis. It 
is demonstrated on single contrast esophagography in an 
immunocompetent patient with no features of connective 
tissue disorder or functional esophageal obstruction.
Conclusion
Many patients will still continue to be examined initially by 
barium esophagography, and some patients such as those 
with AIDS whose endoscopy represents a risk of disease 
transmission to other patients, may not be considered 
candidates for more invasive study. It is important therefore, 
Figure 1: Barium esophagogram showing a long narrowed segment 
with fine out pouches in the mid third of esophagus giving “feathery” 
appearance
Figure 2: Whitish patches with hyperaemic areas seen within the 
esophageal mucosal demonstrated at flexible esophagoscopy
Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/wajr by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AW
nYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8KKGKV0Ymy+78= on 01/14/2025
Adesiyun, et al.: Candida esophagitis
112
West African Journal of Radiology  ♦  Vol. 22, Issue 2, July-December 2015
for radiologists to be familiar with the common and unusual 
manifestations of esophageal candidiasis. Candida esophagitis 
should be strongly suspected if “feathery” appearance is the 
only sign demonstrated on esophagography especially in 
immunocompetent patients.
