Guidelines for Treatment of Candidiasis • CID 2004:38 (15 January) • 161
I D S A G U I D E L I N E S
Guidelines for Treatment of Candidiasis
Peter G. Pappas,1 John H. Rex,2 Jack D. Sobel,3 Scott G. Filler,4 William E. Dismukes,1 Thomas J. Walsh,5
and John E. Edwards4
1Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Alabama; 3AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, Manchester, Great Britain;
3Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan; 4Harbor–University of California-Los Angeles Medical Center, Torrance, California;
and 5Immunocompromised Host Section, Pediatric Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Candida species are the most common cause of fungal
infections. Candida species produce infections that
range from non–life-threatening mucocutaneous illnesses to invasive processes that may involve virtually
any organ. Such a broad range of infections requires
an equally broad range of diagnostic and therapeutic
strategies. These guidelines summarize current knowledge about treatment of multiple forms of candidiasis
for the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA).
Throughout this document, treatment recommendations are rated according to the standard scoring
scheme used in other IDSA guidelines to illustrate the
strength of the supporting evidence and quality of the
underlying data (table 1). This document covers the
following 4 major topical areas.
The role of the microbiology laboratory.
To a
greater extent than for other fungi, treatment of candidiasis can now be guided by in vitro susceptibility
testing. However, susceptibility testing of fungi is not
considered a routine testing procedure in many laboratories, is not always promptly available, and is not
universally considered as the standard of care. Knowledge of the infecting species, however, is highly predictive of likely susceptibility and can be used as a guide
to therapy. The guidelines review the available inforReceived 12 September 2003; accepted 12 September 2003; electronically
published 19 December 2003.
These guidelines were developed and issued on behalf of the Infectious
Diseases Society of America.
Authors’ ﬁnancial interests and relationships are listed at the end of the text.
Reprints or correspondence: Dr. Peter G. Pappas, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, 1900 University Blvd., 229 Tinsley Harrison Tower, Birmingham, AL
35294-0006 (pappas@uab.edu).
Clinical Infectious Diseases
2004;38:161–89
 2003 by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved.
1058-4838/2004/3802-0001$15.00
mation supporting current testing procedures and interpretive breakpoints and place these data into clinical
context. Susceptibility testing is most helpful in dealing
with deep infection due to non–albicans species of Candida. In this setting, especially if the patient has been
treated previously with an azole antifungal agent, the
possibility
of
microbiological
resistance
must
be
considered.
Treatment of invasive candidiasis.
In addition to
acute hematogenous candidiasis, the guidelines review
strategies for treatment of 15 other forms of invasive
candidiasis (table 2). Extensive data from randomized
trials are available only for therapy of acute hematogenous candidiasis in the nonneutropenic adult. Choice
of therapy for other forms of candidiasis is based on
case series and anecdotal reports. In general, amphotericin B–based preparations, the azole antifungal
agents, and the echinocandin antifungal agents play a
role in treatment. Choice of therapy is guided by weighing the greater activity of amphotericin B–based preparations and the echinocandin antifungal agents for
some non–albicans species (e.g., Candida krusei) against
the ready availability of oral and parenteral formulations for the azole antifungal agents. Flucytosine has
activity against many isolates of Candida but is infrequently used.
Treatment of mucocutaneous candidiasis.
Therapy for mucosal infections is dominated by the azole
antifungal agents. These drugs may be used topically
or systemically and are safe and efﬁcacious. A signiﬁcant
problem with mucosal disease is the propensity for a
small proportion of patients to have repeated relapses.
In some situations, the explanation for such a relapse
is obvious (e.g., recurrent oropharyngeal candidiasis in
an individual with advanced and uncontrolled HIV infection), but in other patients, the cause is cryptic (e.g.,
relapsing vaginitis in a healthy woman). Rational stratDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/38/2/161/286280 by guest on 14 January 2025
162 • CID 2004:38 (15 January) • Pappas et al.
Table 1.
Infectious Diseases Society of America–United States Public Health Service grading system for
rating recommendations in clinical guidelines.
Category, grade
Deﬁnition
Strength of recommendation
A
Good evidence to support a recommendation for use
B
Moderate evidence to support a recommendation for use
C
Poor evidence to support a recommendation
D
Moderate evidence to support a recommendation against use
E
Good evidence to support a recommendation against use
Quality of evidence
1
Evidence from 1 properly randomized, controlled trial
2
Evidence from 1 well-designed clinical trial, without randomization; from cohort
or case-controlled analytic studies (preferably from 11 center); from multiple
time-series; or from dramatic results from uncontrolled experiments
3
Evidence from opinions of respected authorities, based on clinical experience,
descriptive studies, or reports of expert committees
egies for these situations are discussed in the guidelines and
must consider the possibility of induction of resistance with
prolonged or repeated exposure.
Prevention of invasive candidiasis.
Prophylactic strategies
are useful if the risk of a target disease is sharply elevated in a
readily identiﬁed patient group. Selected patient groups undergoing therapy that produces prolonged neutropenia (e.g.,
some bone marrow transplant recipients) or who receive a
solid-organ transplant (e.g., some liver transplant recipients)
have a sufﬁcient risk of invasive candidiasis to warrant
prophylaxis.
INTRODUCTION
Relationship between epidemiology of candidal infections
and therapy.
Although Candida albicans remains the most
common pathogen in oropharyngeal and cutaneous candidiasis, non-albicans species of Candida are increasingly associated
with invasive candidiasis [1–5]. This shift is particularly problematic in patients with acute life-threatening invasive candidal
infections. Although the susceptibility of Candida to the currently available antifungal agents can be predicted if the species
of the infecting isolate is known (table 3) [1, 4, 6, 11–17, 20–
24], individual isolates do not necessarily follow the general
pattern. For example, C. albicans is usually susceptible to all
major agents. However, azole resistance for this species is now
well described among HIV-infected individuals with recurrent
oropharyngeal candidiasis and is also reported sporadically in
critically ill adults with invasive candidiasis [25] or in healthy
adults [26]. For this reason, susceptibility testing for azole resistance is increasingly used to guide the management of candidiasis in patients, especially in situations where there is failure
to respond to the initial empirical therapy. On the other hand,
most Candida isolates appear to remain susceptible to amphotericin B, although recent data suggest that isolates of Candida
glabrata and C. krusei may require maximal doses of amphotericin B (see next section).
Susceptibility testing and drug dosing.
Intensive efforts
to develop standardized, reproducible, and clinically relevant
susceptibility testing methods for fungi have resulted in the
development of the NCCLS M27-A methodology (now updated
with the essentially identical M27-A2 methodology) for susceptibility testing of yeasts [27, 28]. Data-driven interpretive
breakpoints using this method are available for testing the susceptibility of Candida species to ﬂuconazole, itraconazole, and
ﬂucytosine [28–31]. Several features of these breakpoints are
important. First, these interpretive breakpoints should not be
applied to other methods without extensive testing. Although
the M27-A2 methodology is not the only possible way to determine an MIC, use of the M27-A2 interpretive breakpoints
with other methods should be approached with caution—even
small methodological variations may produce results that are
not correctly interpreted by means of these breakpoints. Second, these interpretive breakpoints place a strong emphasis on
interpretation in the context of the delivered dose of the azole
antifungal agent. The novel category “susceptibility–dose/delivery dependent” (S-DD) indicates that maximization of dosage and bioavailability are critical to successful therapy (table
4). In the case of ﬂuconazole, data for both human beings and
animals suggest that S-DD isolates may be treated successfully
with a dosage of 12 mg/kg per day [30, 32]. Although trials to
date have not used this method, administration of twice the
usual daily dose of ﬂuconazole as a loading dose is a pharmacologically rational way to more rapidly achieve higher
steady-state blood concentrations. In the case of itraconazole,
oral absorption is somewhat unpredictable, and achievingblood
levels of 0.5 mg/mL (as determined by high-performance liquid chromatography) appears to be important to successful
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/38/2/161/286280 by guest on 14 January 2025
Guidelines for Treatment of Candidiasis • CID 2004:38 (15 January) • 163
Table 2.
Summary of treatment guidelines for candidiasis.
Condition
Therapy
Duration
Comments
Primary
Alternative
Candidemia
Nonneutropenic adults
AmB 0.6–1.0 mg/kg per day
iv; or Flu 400–800 mg/day iv
or po; or Caspa
AmB 0.7 mg/kg per day
plus Flu 800 mg/day for
4–7 day, then Flu 800
mg/day
14 days after last positive
blood culture and resolution of signs and
symptoms
Remove all intravascular
catheters, if possible
Children
AmB 0.6–1.0 mg/kg per day
iv; or Flu 6 mg/kg q12 h iv
or po
Casp
14–21 days after resolution
of signs and symptoms
and negative repeat
blood cultures
PK data in children for Casp
are not available
Neonates
AmB 0.6–1.0 mg/kg per day
iv; or Flu 5–12 mg/kg per
day iv
Casp
14–21 days after resolution
of signs and symptoms
and negative repeat
blood cultures
PK data in neonates for
Casp are not available
Neutropenia
AmB 0.7–1.0 mg/kg per day
iv; or LFAmB 3.0–6.0 mg/kg
per day; or Casp
Flu 6–12 mg/kg per day iv
or po
14 days after last positive
blood cultures and resolution of signs and symptoms and resolved
neutropenia
Removal of all intravascular
catheters is controversial
in neutropenic patients;
gastrointestinal source is
common
Chronic disseminated
candidiasis
AmB 0.6–0.7 mg/kg per day
or LFAmB 3–5 mg/kg per
day
Flu 6 mg/kg per day or
Casp
3–6 months and resolution
or calciﬁcation of radiologic lesions
Flu may be given after 1–2
weeks of AmB therapy if
clinically stable or
improved
Disseminated cutaneous
neonatal candidiasis
AmB 0.5–1.0 mg/kg per day
Flu 6–12 mg/kg per day
14–21 days after clinical
improvement
Treat as for neonatal
candidemia
Urinary candidiasis
See relevant discussion in text
…
…
…
Osteomyelitis and arthritis
See relevant discussion in text
…
…
…
Intra-abdominal candidiasis
See relevant discussion in text
…
…
…
Endocarditis
AmB 0.6–1.0 mg/kg per day
iv; or LFAmB 3.0–6.0 mg/kg
per day plus 5-FC 25–37.5
mg/kg po q.i.d.
Flu 6–12 mg/kg per day po
or iv; Casp
At least 6 weeks after
valve replacement
Valve replacement is almost always necessary;
long-term suppression
with Flu has been successful for patients who
cannot undergo valve
replacement
Suppurative phlebitis
See relevant discussion in text
…
…
…
Meningitis
See relevant discussion in text
…
…
…
Endophthalmitis
AmB 0.7–1.0 mg/kg per day
iv; or Flu 6–12 mg/kg per
day po or iv
…
6–12 weeks after surgery
Vitrectomy is usually performed when vitreitis is
present.
Mucocutaneous candidiasis
…
…
…
Oropharyngeal
Clo 10 mg 5 times/day; or
Nys 200,000–400,000 U 5
times/day; or Flu 100–200
mg/day po
Itr 200 mg/day po; or AmB
1 mL q.i.d. po;b or AmB
10.3 mg/kg per day iv;b
or Casp 50 mg/day ivb
7–14 days after clinical
improvement
Long-term suppression with
Flu (200 mg/day) in patients with AIDS and a
history of OPC is acceptable and does not appear
to lead to Flu resistance
Esophageal
Flu 100–200 mg/day po or iv;
or Itr 200 mg/day
Vor 4 mg/kg b.i.d. iv or po;c
or AmB 0.3–.7 mg/kg per
day iv;c or Caspc
14–21 days after clinical
improvement
IV therapy is necessary for
patients with severe and/
or refractory esophagitis
Genital candidiasis
See relevant discussion in text
…
…
…
NOTE.
AmB, conventional deoxycholate amphotericin B; Casp, caspofungin; Clo, clotrimazole; Flu, ﬂuconazole; Itr, itraconazole; LF, lipid formulation; Nys,
nystatin; PK, pharmacological; Vor, voriconazole; 5-FC, 5-ﬂucytosine.
a Casp dosing in adults consists of 70-mg loading dose followed by 50 mg iv.
b AmB iv and po and Casp iv are indicated for refractory or pharyngeal candidiasis.
c Vor, AmB, and Casp are indicated for severe and/or refractory esophageal candidiasis.
therapy. Finally, these breakpoints were developed on the basis
of data from 2 groups of infected adult patients: patients with
oropharyngeal and esophageal candidiasis (for ﬂuconazole and
itraconazole) and patients with invasive candidiasis (mostly
nonneutropenic patients with candidemia; for ﬂuconazole
only) [30] and are supported by subsequent reports [27, 31,
33, 34]. Although these limitations are similar to those of interpretive breakpoints for antibacterial agents [27], and exDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/38/2/161/286280 by guest on 14 January 2025
164 • CID 2004:38 (15 January) • Pappas et al.
Table 3.
General patterns of susceptibility of Candida species.
Candida species
Fluconazole
Itraconazole
Voriconazoled
Flucytosine
Amphotericin B
Candinsa
C. albicans
S
S
S
S
S
S
C. tropicalis
S
S
S
S
S
S
C. parapsilosis
S
S
S
S
S
S (to I?)
C. glabrata
S-DD to Rb
S-DD to Rc
S to Id
S
S to Ie
S
C. krusei
R
S-DD to Rc
S to Id
I to R
S to Ie
S
C. lusitaniae
S
S
S
S
S to Rf
S
NOTE.
Except for amphotericin B, interpretations are based on use of the NCCLS M27-A methodology, and the underlying
data were drawn from a variety of sources [1, 6–9, 10]. The data for amphotericin B also include results of studies in which
modiﬁcations of the M27-A methodology have been used to enhance detection of amphotericin B–resistant isolates [6, 11,
12]. See table 4 for the speciﬁc interpretive breakpoints used to construct this table. I, intermediately resistant; R, resistant;
S, susceptible; S-DD, susceptible-dose/delivery dependent.
a Susceptibility methods for the echinocandin antifungal agents (caspofungin, micafungin, and anidulafungin) are not standardized, and interpretive criteria are not available. The 3 drugs show generally similar susceptibility patterns and therefore
are shown as a class. On the basis of this overall pattern of relative MICs [13–16], isolates of C. parapsilosis and C. guilliermondii
tend to have numerically higher MICs than do the other species. However, the signiﬁcance of this is entirely unknown at
present, and clinical responses to invasive disease have been observed with all Candida species for caspofungin [17].
b On the basis of recent surveys of recent bloodstream isolates [1, 4], 10%–15% of C. glabrata isolates are resistant to
ﬂuconazole.
c In addition, 46%–53% of C. glabrata isolates and 31% of C. krusei isolates are resistant to itraconazole.
d The signiﬁcance of voriconazole MICs has yet to be established. On the basis of recent surveys [18], C. glabrata and C.
krusei have MICs that are consistently higher than those of the other major species. However, these MICs are generally 1
mg/mL, these isolates are therefore potentially treatable (on the basis of this compound’s achievable blood levels), and
successful therapy with isolates of these species has been described [19]. The entry in the table is meant to describe this
current lack of information.
e On the basis of a combination of in vitro data [4, 11, 20] and in vivo data [21, 22], it appears that a signiﬁcant proportion
of the isolates of C. glabrata and C. krusei have reduced susceptibility to amphotericin B.
f Although not seen in all isolates, amphotericin B resistance is well described for isolates of this species [23, 24].
trapolation of these results to other diagnostic settings appears
to be rational on the basis of data from in vivo therapy models,
it is still prudent to consider the limitations of the data when
making use of the breakpoints. Pharmacology, safety, published
reports, drug interactions, and isolate susceptibility [27] must
be considered when selecting a therapy. For example, most
isolates of Candida are susceptible to itraconazole, but this
agent only recently became available as a parenteral preparation
and has not been studied intensively for candidiasis, except for
treatment of mucosal disease.
Reliable and convincing interpretive breakpoints are not yet
available for amphotericin B. The NCCLS M27-A2 methodology does not reliably identify amphotericin B–resistant isolates [6]. Variations of the M27-A2 methodology using different
media [6], agar-based MIC methods [12, 35, 36], and measurements of minimum fungicidal concentrations [11] appear
to enhance detection of resistant isolates. Although these methods are as yet insufﬁciently standardized to permit routine use,
several generalizations are becoming apparent. First, amphotericin B resistance appears uncommon among isolates of Candida albicans, Candida tropicalis, and C. parapsilosis. Second,
isolates of Candida lusitaniae most often demonstrate readily
detectable and clinically apparent amphotericin B resistance.
Not all isolates are resistant [11, 23, 37], but therapeutic failure
of amphotericin B is well documented [38]. Third, a growing
body of data suggests that a nontrivial proportion of the isolates
of C. glabrata and C. krusei may be resistant to amphotericin
B [4, 11, 20–22]. Of importance, delivery of additional amphotericin B by use of a lipid-based preparation of amphotericin B may be inadequate to overcome this resistance [22]. Also,
because of in vitro effects of the lipid, tests for susceptibility
to amphotericin B should always use the deoxycholate rather
than the lipid formulation [39]. Unfortunately, the clinical relevance of these observations is uncertain. Most rational current
therapy of infections due to these species (C. lusitaniae, C.
glabrata, and C. krusei) thus involves (1) awareness of the possibility of true microbiological resistance among the species and
(2) judicious and cautious use of susceptibility testing. When
amphotericin B deoxycholate is used to treat infections due to
C. glabrata or C. krusei, doses of at least 1 mg/kg per day may
be needed, especially in profoundly immunocompromised
hosts.
Meaningful data do not yet exist for other compounds. This
includes speciﬁcally the newer expanded-spectrum triazoles
(voriconazole, posaconazole, and ravuconazole) and the echinocandins (caspofungin, micafungin, and anidulafungin). Although MIC data for these compounds are available for all
major Candida species (table 3), the interpretation of those
MICs in relation to achievable blood levels is uncertain [29].
This is particularly true for the echinocandin antifungal agents.
Practical clinical use of antifungal susceptibility testing.
Antifungal susceptibility testing has not achieved the status of
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/38/2/161/286280 by guest on 14 January 2025
Guidelines for Treatment of Candidiasis • CID 2004:38 (15 January) • 165
Table 4.
Interpretive breakpoints for isolates of Candida
species.
Drug
MIC range, mg/mL
Susceptible
Intermediately
susceptible
Resistant
Fluconazole
8
16–32 (S-DDa)
132
Itraconazole
0.125
0.25–0.5 (S-DDa)
10.5
Flucytosine
4
8–16
116
NOTE.
Shown are the breakpoints proposed for use with the NCCLS M27A broth susceptibility testing method for Candida species [30]. Isolates of
Candida krusei are assumed to be intrinsically resistant to ﬂuconazole and
these breakpoints do not apply.
a Susceptible-dose/delivery dependent; see Introduction.
a standard of care and is not widely available, and results of
testing may not be available for days. The strongest data to
date are for ﬂuconazole, an agent for which the issues of resistance are most compelling. The greatest concern for ﬂuconazole resistance relates to C. glabrata, for which rates of resistance as high as 15% have been reported [40]. Testing is most
often used in 1 of 2 ways [27]. First, susceptibility is useful in
the evaluation of the possible causes of lack of clinical response.
Second, the data may be used to support a change in therapy
from a parenteral agent of any class to oral ﬂuconazole. This
consideration is most relevant when considering outpatient
therapy and for treating infections that require protracted therapy (e.g., meningitis, endocarditis, and osteomyelitis).
AVAILABLE DRUGS AND DRUG USE
The rapid pace of antifungal drug development has resulted in
the recent licensure of 2 new antifungal drugs (voriconazole
and caspofungin), along with the active development of 4 others
(ravuconazole, posaconazole, micafungin, and anidulafungin).
In addition, new data continue to accumulate for itraconazole
and the lipid-associated preparations of amphotericin B. Although all these compounds appear to have signiﬁcant activity
against Candida species, the size of the published clinical database for these compounds for treatment of candidiasis is limited. In an effort to integrate these agents into the guidelines,
the available data on the newly licensed agents will be summarized here.
Itraconazole.
An intravenous preparation of itraconazole
in hydroxy-propyl-b-cyclodextrin has been licensed. This formulation is administered at a dosage of 200 mg q12h for a
total of 4 doses (i.e., 2 days) followed by 200 mg/day and was
licensed on the basis of evidence that this dosing regimen
achieves adequate blood levels more rapidly and with less patient-to-patient variability than do oral preparations of the drug
[41–44]. Itraconazole is well known to be active against mucosal
forms of candidiasis (see Nongenital Mucocutaneous Candidiasis, below), but the availability of an intravenous form of
itraconazole allows for treatment of invasive disease. Although
itraconazole would be expected to have activity broadly similar
to that of ﬂuconazole, the 2 compounds have quite different
pharmacological properties and clinical activities for other mycoses [45]. Moreover, formal studies of intravenous itraconazole for invasive candidiasis are not available. Therefore, the
discussion of therapy for invasive candidiasis will generally not
address intravenous itraconazole.
Voriconazole and the newer azole antifungal agents.
Voriconazole is available in both oral and parenteral preparations.
It is as active as ﬂuconazole against esophageal candidiasis,
although it was associated with more adverse events in a recent
study [46]. Among 4 pediatric patients who received voriconazole as salvage therapy, candidemia cleared in 2 of 2 patients
and disseminated candidiasis resolved in 1 of 2 patients [47].
It is notable that voriconazole appears to have the potential to
be active against some ﬂuconazole-resistant isolates. Of 12 HIVinfected subjects with ﬂuconazole-refractory esophageal candidiasis due to C. albicans, 7 were cured and the conditions of
3 improved because of treatment with voriconazole [48]. Consistent with its activity against C. krusei in a guinea pig model
[49], recent experience from open-label protocols reported response in 7 (70%) of 10 patients with invasive disease due to
this species [19]. On the basis of these data, voriconazole received an indication in the European Union for “treatment of
ﬂuconazole-resistant serious invasive Candida infections (including C. krusei).” Voriconazole is not currently licensed for
this indication in the United States, awaiting an analysis of a
recently
completed
worldwide
study
of
its
activity
in
candidemia.
The in vitro anti-Candida activity of the other azoles under
active development (posaconazole and ravuconazole) also appears to be good [50]. The available clinical data for posaconazole include reports of successful salvage therapy for invasive
candidiasis [51], successful salvage therapy of azole-refractory
oropharyngeal candidiasis in HIV-infected individuals [52], and
2 randomized comparisons showing efﬁcacy comparable with
that of ﬂuconazole for non–azole-refractory esophageal candidiasis [53, 54]. The available data for ravuconazole include
a randomized phase II dose-ranging study showing efﬁcacy
comparable with that of ﬂuconazole for non–azole-refractory
esophageal candidiasis [55].
Caspofungin and the echinocandin antifungal agents.
Caspofungin is the ﬁrst of the echinocandin antifungal agents
to be licensed. As with all of the agents of this class, this agent
is only available as a parenteral preparation, and its spectrum
is largely limited to Candida and Aspergillus species. Of particular relevance for use as empirical treatment, the agents of
this class do not appear to have signiﬁcant activity against
Cryptococcus neoformans or against ﬁlamentous fungi other
than Aspergillus [56].
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/38/2/161/286280 by guest on 14 January 2025
166 • CID 2004:38 (15 January) • Pappas et al.
Caspofungin has been shown to be as effective as both amphotericin B deoxycholate and ﬂuconazole when used as therapy for oropharyngeal and esophageal candidiasis [57–60].
Likewise, Mora-Duarte et al. [17] found that caspofungin (70mg loading dose followed by 50 mg/day in adults) was equivalent to but better tolerated than was amphotericin B deoxycholate (0.6–1.0 mg/kg per day) for cases of invasive candidiasis
(83% of which were candidemia, 10% of which were peritonitis,
and 7% of which were miscellaneous cases). Finally, caspofungin was effective in 72% of patients with ﬂuconazole-resistant
esophageal candidiasis [61]. This agent appears to be active
against all Candida species; however, the MICs for some isolates
of C. parapsilosis and Candida guilliermondii are relatively
higher. The meaning of these higher MICs is still being investigated, but the data from the aforementioned study by MoraDuarte et al. [17] hint at their possible clinical relevance [62].
Although C. parapsilosis caused only 19% of cases of fungemia
in the caspofungin-treated group in that study, it was associated
with 42% cases of persistent fungemia. Conversely, the species
distribution of cases of persistent fungemia for amphotericin
B–treated patients more closely paralleled the distribution of
infecting species. It must be emphasized, however, that the total
number of cases is very small and that the overall success rates
for treatment of infections due to C. parapsilosis were similar
between the study arms. Thus, these data suggest that echinocandins may be used successfully for treatment of C. parapsilosis fungemia but that the physician should be aware of the
possibility that this species might respond less readily to this
class of agents.
The in vitro activity of the other 2 agents in this category
(anidulafungin and micafungin) against Candida species appears quite similar to that of caspofungin, and clinical data are
expected to support similar patterns of utility. However, available clinical data for these agents are as yet limited to openlabel dose-ranging studies of micafungin for treatment of
esophageal candidiasis [63–65], open-label studies of anidulafungin for esophageal candidiasis [66], open-label data on
micafungin administered to patients with candidemia [67, 68],
and a randomized, double-blind comparison of micafungin
with ﬂuconazole as prophylaxis during the period of risk for
neutropenia following bone marrow transplantation [69].
Amphotericin B deoxycholate and the lipid-associated formulations of amphotericin B.
The majority of the experience
with amphotericin B is with its classic deoxycholate preparation. However, 3 lipid-associated formulations of amphotericin
B have been developed and approved for use in humans: amphotericin B lipid complex (ABLC) (Abelcet; Enzon), amphotericin B colloidal dispersion (ABCD) (Amphotec [in the
United States] and Amphocil [elsewhere]; InterMune), and liposomal amphotericin B (AmBisome; Vestar). The names of
these compounds, along with the requirement for use of the
lipid-associated formulations at much higher doses than the
deoxycholate preparation, have led to much confusion. The
reader should note carefully that (1) “liposomal amphotericin
B” is the name of a speciﬁc lipid-associated product, (2) a useful
general term for the class is “lipid-associated formulations of
amphotericin B,” (3) the 3 lipid-associated formulations of
amphotericin B have different pharmacological properties and
rates of treatment-related adverse events and thus should not
be interchanged without careful consideration, (4) the typical
intravenous dose for amphotericin B deoxycholate is 0.6–1.0
mg/kg per day, and (e) the typical dosage for the lipid-associated formulations when used for candidiasis is 3–5 mg/kg per
day.
In this document, a reference to “intravenous amphotericin
B” without a speciﬁc dose or other discussion of form should
be taken to be a reference to the general use of any of the
preparations of amphotericin B, with the understanding that
the clinical experience is greatest with amphotericin B deoxycholate for essentially all forms of candidiasis and classes of
patients. On the other hand, references to a speciﬁc formulation
and dosage indicate more-speciﬁc data. We are not aware of
any forms of candidiasis for which a lipid-associated formulation of amphotericin B is superior to amphotericin B deoxycholate [70], but we are also not aware of any situations in
which a lipid-associated formulation would be contraindicated.
The only possible exception is urinary candidiasis in which the
protection of the kidney afforded by the altered pharmacological properties of the lipid-associated preparations of amphotericin B [71] has the theoretical potential to reduce delivery
of amphotericin B and thus slow the pace of response [72].
The relative paucity of organized clinical data does, however,
produce uncertainty regarding the optimal dose and duration
of therapy with these agents.
Only ABLC and liposomal amphotericin B have been approved for use in proven cases of candidiasis. These approvals
are for second-line therapy for patients who are intolerant of
or have an infection refractory to therapy with conventional
amphotericin B deoxycholate; these circumstances were deﬁned
in one study in which ABLC was administered as failure of
therapy with amphotericin B deoxycholate (500 mg), initial
renal insufﬁciency (creatinine level of 2.5 mg/dL or creatinine
clearance of !25 mL/min), a signiﬁcant increase in creatinine
level (up to 2.5 mg/dL in adults or 1.5 mg/dL in children [73]),
or severe, acute, administration-related toxicity. Patients with
invasive candidiasis also have been treated successfully with
ABCD [74, 75]. Both in vivo and clinical studies indicate that
these compounds are less toxic but as effective as amphotericin
B deoxycholate when used in appropriate dosages [76, 77].
Nevertheless, their higher cost and the paucity of randomized
trials of their efﬁcacy against proven invasive candidiasis limit
their front-line use for treatment of these infections. These
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/38/2/161/286280 by guest on 14 January 2025
Guidelines for Treatment of Candidiasis • CID 2004:38 (15 January) • 167
agents dramatically alter the pharmacology of amphotericin B,
and the full implications of these changes are not yet known
[78, 79].
Although amphotericin B deoxycholate has long been the
standard agent for treatment of invasive candidiasis, the toxicity
of this preparation is increasingly appreciated. Lipid-associated
preparations have previously been considered primarily for patients who are intolerant of or have an infection refractory to
the deoxycholate preparation. However, data showing that amphotericin B–induced nephrotoxicity may be associated with
an up to 6.6-fold increase in mortality [80] makes consideration
of initial use of lipid-associated amphotericin B appropriate for
individuals who are at high risk of being intolerant of amphotericin B deoxycholate (e.g., those who require prolonged therapy; have preexisting renal dysfunction; or require continued
concomitant use of another nephrotoxic agent, such as cisplatinum, an aminoglycoside, or cyclosporine [81, 82]). Some
authors have also suggested that residence in an intensive care
unit (ICU) or an intermediate care unit at the time of initiation
of amphotericin B deoxycholate therapy is an additional risk
factor for renal failure [82]. Additional work is required to help
identify those individuals who can safely tolerate the deoxycholate preparation. The lipid-associated agents are licensed to
be administered at the following dosages: ABLC, 5 mg/kg per
day; ABCD, 3–6 mg/kg per day; and liposomal amphotericin
B, 3–5 mg/kg per day. The optimal dosages of these compounds
for serious Candida infections is unclear, and the agents appear
generally equipotent. Dosages of 3–5 mg/kg would appear suitable for treatment of most serious candidal infections [83, 84].
Appropriate dosages in pediatric patients.
The topic of
the pharmacological properties of antifungal agents in children
and infants has been reviewed in detail [85]. Data on dosing
for the antifungal agents in pediatric patients are limited. Amphotericin B deoxycholate appears to have similar kinetics in
neonates and adults [86]. A phase I and II study of ABLC (2–
5 mg/kg per day) in the treatment of hepatosplenic candidiasis
in children found that the area under the curve and the maximal
concentration of drug were similar to those of adults and that
steady-state concentration appeared to be achieved after ∼7
days of therapy [83]. Anecdotal data suggest that liposomal
amphotericin B can be used in neonates [87]. Because clearance
of ﬂucytosine is directly proportional to glomerular ﬁltration
rate, infants with very low birth weight may accumulate high
plasma concentrations because of immature renal function
[88].
The pharmacokinetics of ﬂuconazole vary with age [89–92].
Because of its more rapid clearance in children (plasma halflife, ∼14 h) [89], ﬂuconazole at a dosage of 6 mg/kg q12h
should be administered for treatment of life-threatening infections. In comparison with the volume of distribution seen in
adults (0.7 L/kg), neonates may have a 2–3-fold higher volume
of distribution that falls to !1 L/kg by 3 months of age. In
comparison with the half-life of ﬂuconazole in adults (30 h),
the half-life in neonates is 55–90 h [93]. Despite this prolonged
half-life, once-daily dosing seems prudent in infants with low
or very low birth weight who are being treated for disseminated
candidiasis. A dosage of 5 mg/kg per day has been used safely
and successfully in this population [94].
Itraconazole cyclodextrin oral solution (5 mg/kg per day)
administered to infants and children was found to provide
potentially therapeutic concentrations in plasma [95]. The levels were, however, substantially lower than those attained in
adult patients with cancer, particularly in children aged between
6 months and 2 years. A recent study of itraconazole cyclodextrin oral solution (2.5 mg/kg per day and 5 mg/kg per day)
in HIV-infected children documented its efﬁcacy for treating
oropharyngeal candidiasis in pediatric patients [96]. The newly
licensed intravenous formulation of itraconazole has not been
studied in pediatric patients.
The published data on the use of the echinocandins in pediatric or neonatal patients includes small numbers of patients
treated with caspofungin and micafungin [97–99]. The data
suggest safety and efﬁcacy in such patients.
TREATMENT GUIDELINES OVERVIEW
These practice guidelines provide recommendations for treatment of various forms of candidiasis. For each form, we specify
objectives; treatment options; outcomes of treatment; evidence;
values; beneﬁts, harms, and costs; and key recommendations.
Please see the discussion above with regard to available therapeutic agents: the amount of data on the newest agents (caspofungin and voriconazole) is quite limited, and they will be
mentioned below only in reference to selected presentations of
candidiasis.
CANDIDEMIA AND ACUTE HEMATOGENOUSLY
DISSEMINATED CANDIDIASIS
Objective.
To resolve signs and symptoms of associated
sepsis, to sterilize the bloodstream and any clinically evident
sites of hematogenous dissemination, and to treat occult sites
of hematogenous dissemination.
Treatment options.
Intravenous amphotericin B, intravenous or oral ﬂuconazole, intravenous caspofungin, or the
combination of ﬂuconazole plus amphotericin B (with the amphotericin B administered for the ﬁrst 5–6 days only). Flucytosine could be considered in combination with amphotericin
B for more-severe infections (C-III; see table 1 and Sobel [100]
for deﬁnitions of categories reﬂecting the strength of each recommendation for or against its use and grades reﬂecting the
quality of evidence on which recommendations are based). ReDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/38/2/161/286280 by guest on 14 January 2025
168 • CID 2004:38 (15 January) • Pappas et al.
moval of existing intravascular catheters is desirable, if feasible,
especially in nonneutropenic patients (B-II).
Outcomes.
Clearance of bloodstream and other clinically
evident sites of infection, symptomatic improvement, absence
of retinal ﬁndings of Candida endophthalmitis, and adequate
follow-up to ensure that late-appearing symptoms of focal hematogenous spread are not overlooked.
Evidence.
Candida bloodstream infections are increasingly
frequent [101, 102] and are often associated with clinical evidence of sepsis syndrome and high associated attributable mortality [103, 104]. In addition, hematogenous seeding may compromise the function of 1 organ. Two large randomized
studies [105, 106] and 2 large observational studies [107, 108]
have demonstrated that ﬂuconazole (400 mg/day) and amphotericin B deoxycholate (0.5–0.6 mg/kg per day) are similarly
effective as therapy. A large randomized study has demonstrated
that caspofungin (70 mg on the ﬁrst day followed by 50 mg/
day) is equivalent to amphotericin B deoxycholate (0.6–1.0 mg/
kg per day) for invasive candidiasis (mostly candidemia) [17].
Caspofungin was better tolerated and had a superior response
rate in a predeﬁned secondary analysis of evaluable patients. A
comparison of ﬂuconazole (800 mg/day) with the combination
of ﬂuconazole (800 mg/day) plus amphotericin B deoxycholate
(∼0.7 mg/kd per day for the ﬁrst 5–6 days) as therapy for
candidemia was confounded by differences in severity of illness
between the study groups, but the study found the regimens
to be comparable and noted a trend toward better response
(based principally on more-effective bloodstream clearance) in
the group receiving combination therapy. The randomized
studies are largely limited to nonneutropenic patients, whereas
the observational studies provide data suggesting that ﬂuconazole and amphotericin B are similarly effective in neutropenic
patients. ABLC and liposomal amphotericin B are indicated for
patients intolerant of or with infection refractory to conventional antifungal therapy. Open-label therapy of candidemia
with ABCD (2–6 mg/kg per day) has been successful [75]. In
a randomized trial, ABLC (5 mg/kg per day) was found to be
equivalent to amphotericin B deoxycholate (0.6–1.0 mg/kg per
day) as therapy for nosocomial candidiasis [109].
Values.
Without adequate therapy, endophthalmitis, endocarditis, and other severe disseminated forms of candidiasis
may complicate candidemia. Given the potential severity of the
clinical syndrome, it is important that the initial empirical
choice be adequate to address the most likely species and their
associated susceptibility to the various agents. Candidemia due
to C. parapsilosis has increased in frequency in pediatric populations and appears to be associated with a lower mortality
rate than is candidemia due to other species of Candida [110–
113]. Candidemia due to C. glabrata may be associated with
increased mortality in patients with cancer [113]. In neonates,
a duration of candidemia of 5 days has been linked to the
likelihood of ophthalmologic, renal, and cardiac involvement
[114].
Beneﬁts, harms, and costs.
Effective therapy is potentially
lifesaving. Amphotericin B–induced nephrotoxicity can complicate management of critically ill patients.
Key recommendations.
If feasible, initial nonmedicalmanagement should include removal of all existing central venous
catheters (B-II). The evidence for this recommendation is
strongest for the nonneutropenic patient population [108, 115,
116] and includes data in which catheter removal was associated
with reduced mortality in adults [108, 116] and neonates [117].
In neutropenic patients, the role of the gut as a source for
disseminated candidiasis is evident from autopsy studies, but,
in an individual patient, it is difﬁcult to determine the relative
contributions of the gut and a catheter as primary sources of
fungemia [107, 108, 118]. An exception is made for fungemia
due to C. parapsilosis, which is very frequently associated with
use of catheters (A-II) [107]. There are, however, no randomized studies of this topic, and a recent exhaustive review [119]
clearly demonstrates the limitations of the available data. However, the consensus opinion is that existing central venous catheters should be removed, when feasible [120]. Anecdotal reports
of successful in situ treatment of infected catheters by instillation of antibiotic lock solutions containing as much as 2.5
mg/mL of amphotericin B deoxycholate [121–125] suggest this
as an option in selected cases, but the required duration of
therapy and the frequency of relapse are not known.
Initial medical therapy should involve caspofungin, ﬂuconazole, an amphotericin B preparation, or combination therapy
with ﬂuconazole plus amphotericin B. The choice between these
treatments depends on the clinical status of the patient, the
physician’s knowledge of the species and/or antifungal susceptibility of the infecting isolate, the relative drug toxicity, the
presence of organ dysfunction that would affect drug clearance,
available knowledge of use of the drug in the given patient
population, and the patient’s prior exposure to antifungal
agents. Experience with caspofungin (a 70-mg loading dose
followed by 50 mg daily) is, as yet, limited, but its excellent
clinical activity [17], its broad-spectrum activity against Candida species, and a low rate of treatment-related adverse events
make it a suitable choice for initial therapy in adults (A-I). For
clinically stable patients who have not recently received azole
therapy, ﬂuconazole (6 mg/kg per day; i.e., 400 mg/day for
a 70-kg patient) is another appropriate choice (A-I) [126, 127].
For clinically unstable patients infected with an unspeciated
isolate, ﬂuconazole has been used successfully, but many authorities prefer amphotericin B deoxycholate (0.7 mg/kg per
day) [126, 127] because of its broader spectrum. If a lipidassociated formulation of amphotericin B is selected, a dosage
of at least 3 mg/kg/d appears suitable (C-III). A combination
of ﬂuconazole (800 mg/day) plus amphotericin B deoxycholDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/38/2/161/286280 by guest on 14 January 2025
Guidelines for Treatment of Candidiasis • CID 2004:38 (15 January) • 169
ate (0.7 mg/kg per day for the ﬁrst 5–6 days) is also suitable
(A-I).
Neonates with disseminated candidiasis are usually treated
with amphotericin B deoxycholate because of its low toxicity
and because of the relative lack of experience with other agents
in this population. Fluconazole (6–12 mg/kg per day) has been
used successfully in small numbers of neonates [128–131].
There are currently no data on the pharmacokinetics of caspofungin in neonates.
Antifungal susceptibility can be broadly predicted once the
isolate has been identiﬁed to the species level (see the subsection
Susceptibility testing and drug dosing, in the Introduction).
Infections with C. albicans, C. tropicalis, and C. parapsilosis may
be treated with amphotericin B deoxycholate (0.6 mg/kg per
day), ﬂuconazole (6 mg/kg per day), or caspofungin (70-mg
loading dose followed by 50 mg/day) (A-I). Because C. glabrata
often has reduced susceptibility to both azoles and amphotericin B, opinions on the best therapy are divided [127]. Both
C. krusei and C. glabrata appear susceptible to caspofungin,
and this agent appears to be a good alternative (A-I). Although
fungemia due to C. glabrata has been treated successfully with
ﬂuconazole (6 mg/kg per day) [105, 132], many authorities
prefer amphotericin B deoxycholate (0.7 mg/kg per day) (BIII) [127]. On the basis of pharmacokinetic predictions [133],
ﬂuconazole (12 mg/kg per day; 800 mg/day for a 70-kg patient)
may be a suitable alternative, particularly in less-critically ill
patients (C-III). If the infecting isolate is known or likely to
be C. krusei, available data suggest that amphotericin B deoxycholate (1.0 mg/kg per day) is preferred (C-III). On the basis
of data on open-label salvage therapy, voriconazole is licensed
in Europe (but not the United States) for “treatment of ﬂuconazole-resistant serious invasive Candida infections (including C. krusei)” [19] and could be considered as an alternative
choice (B-III). Many, but not all, isolates of C. lusitaniae are
resistant to amphotericin B. Therefore, ﬂuconazole (6 mg/kg
per day) is the preferred therapy for this species (B-III). Both
voriconazole and caspofungin would be expected to be active
against this species (C-III). Issues associated with selection and
dosage of the lipid amphotericin preparations are discussed in
the Introduction. As discussed above and elsewhere, susceptibility testing may be used to identify isolates that are less likely
to respond to ﬂuconazole (A-II) or amphotericin B (B-II) (table
3) [27, 30].
For candidemia, therapy should be continued for 2 weeks
after the last positive blood culture result and resolution of
signs and symptoms of infection (A-III). Amphotericin B or
caspofungin may be switched to ﬂuconazole (intravenous or
oral) for completion of therapy (B-III). Patients who are neutropenic at the time of developing candidemia should receive
a recombinant cytokine that accelerates recovery from neutropenia (granulocyte colony-stimulating factor or granulocytemonocyte colony-stimulating factor) [134]. Other forms of immunosuppression should be modiﬁed, when possible (e.g., by
reduction of a corticosteroid dosage).
Breakthrough (or persistence of) candidemia in the face of
ongoing antifungal therapy suggests the possibility of an infected intravascular device [135], signiﬁcant immunosuppression [136], or microbiological resistance. Therapy with an agent
from a different class should be started, the isolate should be
promptly identiﬁed to the species level, and susceptibility testing should be considered. Infected intravascular devices should
be removed, when feasible, and immunosuppression should be
ameliorated.
Finally, all patients with candidemia should undergo at least
1 ophthalmological examination to exclude the possibility of
candidal endophthalmitis (A-II). Although some authors have
suggested that examinations should be conducted for 2 weeks
after negative ﬁndings of an initial examination [137], these
recommendations are based on small numbers of patients. The
results of large prospective therapy studies that included careful
ophthalmological examinations suggest that onset of retinal
lesions is rare following an otherwise apparently successful
course of systemic therapy (there were no such cases in 441
successfully treated subjects [17, 105, 132]. We thus conclude
that candidemic individuals should have at least 1 careful ophthalmological examination, preferably at a time when the candidemia appears controlled and new spread to the eye is unlikely
(B-III). These data and recommendations are based almost
entirely on experience in the treatment of nonneutropenic patients—neutropenic patients may not manifest visible endophthalmitis until recovery from neutropenia, and, therefore,
ophthalmological examination should be performed after recovery of the neutrophil count.
EMPIRICAL TREATMENT OF SUSPECTED
DISSEMINATED CANDIDIASIS IN FEBRILE
NONNEUTROPENIC PATIENTS
Objective.
To treat early occult Candida infection.
Treatment options.
Intravenous amphotericin B or intravenous or oral ﬂuconazole.
Outcomes.
Reduction in fever and prevention of development of overt candidal bloodstream infection and the complications
associated
with
hematogenously disseminated
candidiasis.
Evidence.
Although Candida is now the fourth most common bloodstream isolate and is the most common invasive
fungal infection in critically ill nonneutropenic patients, accurate early diagnostic tools for invasive candidiasis are lacking.
One study found that candidemia increased the length of hospitalization by 22 days and increased costs by $34,000–$44,000
[138]. Colonization by Candida of multiple nonsterile sites,
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/38/2/161/286280 by guest on 14 January 2025
170 • CID 2004:38 (15 January) • Pappas et al.
prolonged use of antibacterial antibiotics, presence of central
venous catheters, hyperalimentation, surgery (especiallysurgery
that transects the gut wall), and prolonged ICU stay have all
been linked to increased risk of invasive candidiasis [139–141].
Although empirical therapy is intuitively attractive, colonization does not always imply infection [142], and compelling
data that deﬁne appropriate subsets of patients for such therapy
are lacking.
Values.
Prevention of clinically evident invasivecandidiasis
could potentially reduce morbidity and mortality.
Beneﬁts, harms, and costs.
Given the ill-deﬁned nature
of this syndrome, preference is often given to therapies with
lesser toxicity. Widespread use of inappropriate antifungal therapy may have deleterious epidemiological consequences, including selection of resistant organisms.
Key recommendations.
The utility of antifungal therapy
for this syndrome has not been deﬁned. If therapy is given, its
use should be limited to patients with (1) Candida species
colonization (preferably at multiple sites [139, 143]), (2) multiple other risk factors, and (3) absence of any other uncorrected
causes of fever (C-III) [127]. The absence of colonization by
Candida species indicates a lower risk for invasive candidiasis
and warrants delaying empirical therapy.
EMPIRICAL ANTIFUNGAL TREATMENT OF
NEUTROPENIC PATIENTS WITH PROLONGED
FEVER DESPITE ANTIBACTERIAL THERAPY
Objective.
To treat early occult fungal infection and prevent fungal infection in high-risk patients.
Treatment options.
Empirical therapy should address both
yeast and mould infections. Until recently, amphotericin B was
the only sufﬁciently broad-spectrum agent available in a reliable
parenteral form. Itraconazole has an adequate antifungal spectrum of activity and has been shown to have activity equivalent
to that of amphotericin B [144]. If itraconazole is used, initiation of therapy with the intravenous formulation is appropriate, because the bioavailability of the current oral formulations of itraconazole (including the cyclodextrin solution) is
unpredictable [145, 146]. Fluconazole may be inappropriate
because of prior exposure and its limited spectrum. Voriconazole has been shown to be active in high-risk patients (e.g.,
allogeneic bone marrow transplant recipients and individuals
with relapsed leukemia) for prevention of breakthrough fungal
infections [147]. The role of caspofungin and the other echinocandin antifungal agents in the treatment of such patients is
uncertain.
Outcomes.
Resolution of fever and prevention of development of clinically overt infection.
Evidence.
This clinical condition has recently been reviewed, and there is a related guideline from the IDSA [134].
Randomized, prospective clinical trials have demonstrated that
neutropenic patients with persistent fever despite receipt of
broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy have an ∼20% risk of
developing an overt invasive fungal infection [148, 149]. Empirical antifungal therapy reduces the frequency of development
of clinically overt invasive fungal infection in this high-risk
population [148–150].
Values.
Early antifungal therapy is more likely to succeed
in neutropenic patients. Advanced infection is associated with
high morbidity and mortality.
Beneﬁts, harms, and costs.
Early treatment of fungal infections should reduce fungal infection–associated morbidity.
Key recommendations.
Antifungal therapy is appropriate
in neutropenic patients who have persistent unexplained fever,
despite receipt of 4–7 days of appropriate antibacterial therapy.
Once begun, therapy is continued until resolution of neutropenia. Amphotericin B deoxycholate (0.5–0.7 mg/kg per day)
has traditionally been the preferred agent (A-II). When compared with amphotericin B deoxycholate (median dose, 0.6 mg/
kg per day), liposomal amphotericin B (median dose, 3 mg/kg
per day) showed similar overall clinical efﬁcacy but demonstrated superior safety and a decreased rate of documented
breakthrough fungal infections, particularly in recipients of
bone marrow transplants (A-I) [151]. When compared with
amphotericin B deoxycholate (mean daily dose, 0.7 mg/kg),
itraconazole (200 mg iv q12h for 2 days, 200 mg iv per day
for 12 days, and then 400-mg solution po per day) showed
similar breakthrough fungal infection rates and mortality but
signiﬁcantly less toxicity (A-I) [144]. Although the data are
controversial because some analyses show that voriconazole
was, overall, slightly inferior to liposomal amphotericin B [147,
152–155], voriconazole has been shown to be superior to liposomal amphotericin B in the prevention of breakthrough
fungal infections in high-risk patients (A-I). Thus, use of this
compound should be limited to allogeneic bone marrow transplant recipients and individuals with relapsed leukemia. Fluconazole (400 mg/day) has been used successfully for selected
patients (A-I) [156–158] and could be considered as an alternative strategy [127] if (1) the patient is at low risk for invasive
aspergillosis, (2) the patient lacks any other signs or symptoms
suggesting aspergillosis, (3) local epidemiologic data suggest
that the patient is at low risk for infection with azole-resistant
isolates of Candida, and (4) the patient has not received an
azole antifungal agent as prophylaxis.
CHRONIC DISSEMINATED CANDIDIASIS
(HEPATOSPLENIC CANDIDIASIS)
Objective.
To eradicate foci of chronic disseminated
candidiasis.
Treatment options.
Intravenous amphotericin B or intraDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/38/2/161/286280 by guest on 14 January 2025
Guidelines for Treatment of Candidiasis • CID 2004:38 (15 January) • 171
venous or oral ﬂuconazole. Flucytosine in combination with
one of these agents could be considered for more-refractory
infections.
Outcomes.
Resolution of clinical signs and symptoms of
infection and resolution of radiographic ﬁndings of visceral
involvement.
Evidence. Open-label and observational studies have evaluated the utility of amphotericin B deoxycholate [159, 160],
lipid-associated amphotericin B [83], and ﬂuconazole [161,
162]. A recent case report suggests that caspofungin might have
activity against this form of candidiasis [163].
Values.
This syndrome is not acutely life-threatening but
does require prolonged therapy to produce a cure. Thus, importance is placed on use of a convenient and nontoxic longterm regimen.
Beneﬁts, harms, and costs.
Amphotericin B, although efﬁcacious, must be administered intravenously. Fluconazole can
be given orally.
Key recommendations.
Fluconazole (6 mg/kg per day) is
generally preferred for clinically stable patients (B-III). Amphotericin B deoxycholate (0.6–0.7 mg/kg per day) or a lipidassociated formulation of amphotericin B (3–5 mg/kg per day)
may be used in acutely ill patients or patients with refractory
disease. Some experts recommend an initial 1–2-week course
of amphotericin B for all patients, followed by a prolonged
course of ﬂuconazole [126]. Therapy should be continued until
calciﬁcation or resolution of lesions, particularly in patients
receiving continued chemotherapy or immunosuppression.
Premature discontinuation of antifungal therapy may lead to
recurrent infection. Patients with chronic disseminated candidiasis may continue to receive chemotherapy, including ablative therapy for recipients of bone marrow and/or stem cell
transplants. Treatment of chronic disseminated candidiasis in
such patients continues throughout chemotherapy [160].
DISSEMINATED CUTANEOUS NEONATAL
CANDIDIASIS
Objective.
To treat infants with disseminated cutaneous
neonatal candidiasis (also known as congenital candidiasis)who
are at high risk for developing acute disseminated candidiasis.
Treatment options.
In healthy infants with normal birth
weight, treatment of primary cutaneous candidiasis with topical
agents is generally appropriate. In patients at risk for acute
bloodstream or visceral dissemination, therapies used for acute
disseminated candidiasis are appropriate.
Outcomes.
The neonatal candidiasis syndrome is a unique
syndrome in which widespread dermatitis due to Candida infection is seen in neonates. This syndrome is thought to be
secondary to contamination of the amniotic ﬂuid, and, in
healthy-term infants, this process is usually limited to the skin
and resolves with topical therapy [164]. However, neonates
born prematurely or infants with low birth weight and prolonged rupture of cutaneous membranes, the cutaneous process
may become invasive and produce acute disseminated candidiasis [165].
Evidence.
Essentially all data are derived from small case
series and individual reports. Most reports have been limited
to use of amphotericin B.
Values.
If not treated, acute disseminated candidiasis may
develop, which can be lethal.
Beneﬁts, harms, and costs.
Amphotericin B deoxycholate
therapy is generally well tolerated in neonates. Fluconazole has
not been as well studied. In particular, the pharmacological
properties of ﬂuconazole vary with neonatal age, making the
choice of dosage somewhat difﬁcult [86, 90, 91].
Key recommendations.
Prematurely born neonates, neonates with low birth weight, or infants with prolonged rupture
of membranes who demonstrate the clinical ﬁndings associated
with disseminated neonatal cutaneous candidiasis should be
considered for systemic therapy. Amphotericin B deoxycholate
(0.5–1 mg/kg per day, for a total dose of 10–25 mg/kg) is
generally used (B-III). Fluconazole may be used as a secondline agent (B-III). Dosing issues for neonates are discussed in
the subsection Appropriate dosages for pediatric patients, in
the section Available Drugs and Drug Use (above).
URINARY CANDIDIASIS
Objective.
To eradicate signs and symptoms associated
with parenchymal infection of the urinary collecting system. In
select patients, such therapy might reduce the risk of ascending
or disseminated infection.
Treatment options.
Fluconazole (oral or intravenous),amphotericin B (intravenous), or ﬂucytosine (oral). Because of
bladder irrigation, amphotericin B fails to treat disease above
the level of the bladder.
Outcome.
Clearance of infection in urine.
Evidence.
Urinary candidiasis includes an ill-deﬁned
group of syndromes [166]. The most common risk factors for
candiduria include urinary tract instrumentation, recent receipt
of antibiotic therapy, and advanced age [167]. Candida species
are now the organisms most frequently isolated from the urine
of patients in surgical ICUs. In most patients, isolation of Candida species represents only colonization as a benign event. In
individuals with candidemia, Foley catheter change alone rarely
results in clearance of candiduria (!20%). However, discontinuation of catheter use alone may result in eradication of candiduria in almost 40% of patients [168] (B-III). A recently
completed placebo-controlled trial found that ﬂuconazole (200
mg/day for 14 days) hastened the time to negative results of
urine culture but that the frequency of negative urine culture
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/38/2/161/286280 by guest on 14 January 2025
172 • CID 2004:38 (15 January) • Pappas et al.
results was the same in both treatment groups 2 weeks after
the end of therapy (∼60% for catheterized patients and ∼73%
for noncatheterized patients) [168]. The minimal utility of antifungal therapy against urinary candidiasis is also supported
by a recent large observational study [169]. On the other hand,
candidal urinary tract infections that were accompanied by
radiographic evidence of a bezoar have responded to ﬂuconazole alone [131]. In other patients (e.g., those with obstructive
uropathy), candiduria may rarely be the source of subsequent
dissemination [170] or a marker of acute hematogenous dissemination [166]. These concerns are especially applicable to
neutropenic patients, patients without current or recent placement of medical instruments in the urinary tract, and infants
with low birth weight. Data on the outcome of therapy are
limited by the heterogeneity of the underlying diseases and by
the lack of clear deﬁnitions.
Values.
Treatment of asymptomatic candiduria in nonneutropenic catheterized patients has never been shown to be
of value. Treatment with ﬂuconazole will brieﬂy clear funguria
in approximately one-half of treated patients, but recurrence
is prompt, selection of resistant Candida species is possible, and
therapy does not appear to alter clinical outcome [168]. Candiduria in neutropenic patients, critically ill patients in ICUs,
infants with low birth weight, and recipients of a transplant
may be an indicator of disseminated candidiasis.
Beneﬁts, harms, and costs.
Treatment of appropriately selected patients may reduce the risk of ascending and/or hematogenously disseminated disease. Treatment of persistently
febrile patients who have candiduria but who lack evidence for
infection at other sites may treat occult disseminated candidiasis. Inappropriate therapy may select for resistant organisms.
Key recommendations.
Determination of the clinical relevance of candiduria can be difﬁcult [171]. Asymptomatic candiduria rarely requires therapy (D-III). Candiduria may, however,
be
the
only
microbiological
documentation
of
disseminated candidiasis. Candiduria should be treated in
symptomatic patients, patients with neutropenia, infants with
low birth weight, patients with renal allografts, and patients
who will undergo urologic manipulations (B-III). However,
short courses of therapy are not recommended; therapy for 7–
14 days is more likely to be successful. Removal of urinary tract
instruments, including stents and Foley catheters, is often helpful. If complete removal is not possible, placement of new
devices may be beneﬁcial. Treatment with ﬂuconazole (200 mg/
day for 7–14 days) and with amphotericin B deoxycholate at
widely ranging doses (0.3–1.0 mg/kg per day for 1–7 days) has
been successful [172] (B-II). In the absence of renal insufﬁciency, oral ﬂucytosine (25 mg/kg q.i.d.) may be valuable for
eradicating candiduria in patients with urologic infection due
to non-albicans species of Candida (C-III). However,emergence
of resistance may occur rapidly when this compound is used
as a single agent [173]. Bladder irrigation with amphotericin
B deoxycholate (50–200 mg/mL) may transiently clear funguria
[174] but is rarely indicated (C-III), except as a diagnostic
localizing tool [175]. Even with apparently successful local or
systemic antifungal therapy for candiduria, relapse is frequent,
and this likelihood is increased by continued use of a urinary
catheter. Persistent candiduria in immunocompromised patients warrants ultrasonography or CT of the kidney (C-III).
LOWER RESPIRATORY TRACT CANDIDIASIS
(PULMONARY AND LARYNGEAL
CANDIDIASIS)
Objective.
To eradicate infection and prevent airway obstruction and loss of pulmonary reserve.
Treatment options.
Intravenous amphotericin B or oral
or intravenous ﬂuconazole.
Outcomes.
For pneumonia, treatment clears local sites of
infection along with any associated sites of systemic infection.
For laryngitis, early clinical detection and documentation by
ﬁberoptic or indirect laryngoscopy demonstrates localization of
lesions and assessment of airway patency, permits acquisition
of samples for culture, and enables rapid initiation of antifungal
therapy. Impending airway obstruction is managed by endotracheal intubation. Successful medical therapy resolves laryngeal stridor, prevents airway obstruction, and reduces the risk
of aspiration.
Evidence.
Observational reports and case series have
shown that proven Candida pneumonia is associated with high
mortality among patients with malignancies [176]. No convincing data for any particular form of therapy exist. Data for
laryngitis are based on small series and individual case reports
[177, 178]. Most cases have been managed with amphotericin
B therapy, but milder cases been successfully managed with
ﬂuconazole therapy [179, 180].
Values.
Candida pneumonia seems to exist in 2 forms.
Rarely, after aspiration of oropharyngeal material, primary
pneumonia due to Candida may develop [176, 181,182]. More
commonly, hematogenously disseminated candidiasis produces
pulmonary lesions, along with involvement of multiple additional organs. Firm diagnosis of these disease entities is elusive
and requires histopathological conﬁrmation. Benign colonization of the airway with Candida species and/or contamination
of the respiratory secretions with oropharyngeal material is
much more common than either form of true Candida pneumonia. Thus, diagnoses of Candida pneumonia that are based
solely on microbiological data are often incorrect [183, 184]
(B-III).
If not diagnosed and treated promptly, laryngitis may lead
to airway obstruction and respiratory arrest.
Beneﬁts, harms, and costs.
Injudicious use of antifungal
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/38/2/161/286280 by guest on 14 January 2025
Guidelines for Treatment of Candidiasis • CID 2004:38 (15 January) • 173
therapy for patients with tracheobronchial colonization or oropharyngeal contamination of respiratory secretions may lead
to selection of resistant organisms. Deﬁnitive diagnosis of Candida pneumonia requires histopathological conﬁrmation. In
contrast, because of the severe morbidity and potential mortality associated with laryngeal candidiasis, rapid clinical diagnosis and prompt initiation of therapy are important and
outweigh any adverse effects of antifungal therapy.
Key recommendations.
Most patients with primary Candida pneumonia and laryngeal candidiasis have been treated
with amphotericin B (0.7–1.0 mg/kg per day) (B-III). In cases
of secondary pneumonia associated with hematogenously disseminated infection, therapy directed at disseminated candidiasis, rather than at Candida pneumonia in particular, is indicated (see the section Candidemia and Acute Hematogenously Disseminated Candidiasis, above). For candidal laryngitis, ﬂuconazole is a suitable alternative in milder cases (BIII).
CANDIDAL OSTEOMYELITIS (INCLUDING
MEDIASTINITIS) AND ARTHRITIS
Objective.
To relieve symptoms and eradicate infection.
Treatment options.
After open or arthroscopic debridement or drainage, both intravenous amphotericin B and oral
or intravenous ﬂuconazole have been used.
Outcomes.
Eradication of infection and symptoms and
return of joint function.
Evidence.
Multiple observational studies have been reported, most of which have used intravenous amphotericin B
as the primary therapy, sometimes followed by a course of
treatment with an azole antifungal agent. A few reports have
described initial therapy with an azole.
Values.
Untreated disease leads to crippling disability.
Beneﬁts, harms, and costs.
The high morbidity associated
with untreated disease makes aggressive surgical and medical
therapy appropriate. The presentation of candidal mediastinitis
may be indolent and delayed [185]. Surgical debridement, biopsy, and drainage also serve to provide more-deﬁnitive histopathological and microbiological documentation before initiation of the prolonged therapy required for this class of
infection.
Key recommendations.
Osteomyelitis is best treated with
combined surgical debridement of the affected area, especially
in the case of vertebral osteomyelitis, and antifungal therapy
[186]. Courses of amphotericin B deoxycholate (0.5–1 mg/kg
per day for 6–10 weeks) have been used successfully [187–189].
Fluconazole has been used successfully as initial therapy for
susceptible isolates in 3 reports in which doses of 6 mg/kg per
day for 6–12 months were effective [190–192]. Addition of
amphotericin B deoxycholate to bone cement appears safe and
may be of value in complicated cases [193]. Taken together,
these data suggest that surgical debridement and an initial
course of amphotericin B for 2–3 weeks followed by ﬂuconazole, for a total duration of therapy of 6–12 months, would be
rational (B-III).
Deﬁnitive information on treatment of native joint arthritis
is limited. Adequate drainage is critical to successful therapy
[194]. In particular, management of Candida arthritis of the
hip requires open drainage. Case reports have documented
cures with administration of intravenous amphotericin B [195]
and with ﬂuconazole when administered in conjunction with
adequate drainage. Fluconazole has occasionally been used
alone successfully [196]. As parenteral administration of these
agents produces substantial synovial ﬂuid levels, the utility of
intra-articular therapy is discouraged. Prolonged courses of
therapy similar to those used for treating osteomyelitis appear
to be required (C-III).
Although success with medical therapy alone has been described [197], Candida arthritis that involves a prosthetic joint
generally requires resection arthroplasty [198]. Subsequent
medical therapy mirrors that for native joint disease, and a new
prosthesis may be inserted after successful clearance of the local
infection (C-III).
On the basis of a small number of cases, Candida mediastinitis
may be treated successfully with surgical debridement followed
by either amphotericin B or ﬂuconazole therapy [185, 199] (IIIC). Irrigation of the mediastinal space with amphotericin B is
not recommended, because it may cause chemical mediastinitis.
Prolonged courses of therapy, similar to those needed for osteomyelitis at other sites, appear to be appropriate (C-III).
CANDIDAL INFECTIONS OF THE
GALLBLADDER, PANCREAS, AND
PERITONEUM
Objective.
To eradicate Candida infection and prevent recurrence of infection.
Treatment options.
Intravenous amphotericin B or oral
or intravenous ﬂuconazole.
Outcome.
Clearance of infection, as judged by resolution
of local signs and symptoms along with sterilization of cultures.
Evidence.
Treatment of Candida infection of the pancreas
and biliary tree has been described in case reports and small
series. Successful therapy with either amphotericin B or ﬂuconazole has been described.
Values.
There are 2 major syndromes of peritoneal candidiasis. In disease associated with use of catheters for peritoneal dialysis, catheter removal is often required for successful
therapy [200–203]. Both systemic amphotericin B and ﬂuconazole therapies have been used successfully [201–203].
Candida peritonitis may also develop in association with
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/38/2/161/286280 by guest on 14 January 2025
174 • CID 2004:38 (15 January) • Pappas et al.
surgical or traumatic injury to the gut wall. Others at risk
include patients who recently received chemotherapy for neoplasm or immunosuppressive therapy for transplantation or
to those with inﬂammatory diseases [204]. Candida is usually
part of a polymicrobial infection, and case series suggest that
therapy directed toward Candida species is indicated, particularly when Candida organisms are isolated as part of a complex
infection or in an immunocompromised patient [205–209].
Uncontrolled Candida superinfection has been associated with
signiﬁcant mortality in patients with acute necrotizing pancreatitis [210–213]. A recent small but placebo-controlled trial
demonstrated that ﬂuconazole (400 mg/day) reduced the likelihood of developing symptomatic Candida peritonitis in surgical patients with recurrent gastrointestinal perforations or
anastomotic leakage [214].
Beneﬁts, harms, and costs.
Routine treatment of Candida
isolated following prompt and deﬁnitive repair of an acutely
perforated viscus in otherwise healthy patients without signs
of sepsis is probably not needed and could lead to selection of
resistant organisms.
Key recommendations.
Disease of the biliary tree should
be treated by mechanical restoration of functional drainage,
combined with therapy with either amphotericin B or ﬂuconazole (C-III). Both agents achieve therapeutic biliary concentrations, and local instillation is not needed [215]. Catheterassociated peritonitis is treated with catheter removal and
systemic treatment with amphotericin B or ﬂuconazole (B-III).
After removal of the peritoneal dialysis catheter and a delay of
at least 2 weeks, a new catheter may be placed (B-III) [200].
Intraperitoneal amphotericin B has been associated with painful
chemical peritonitis and should, in general, be avoided. Candida peritonitis related to intra-abdominal leakage of fecal material is treated with surgical repair, drainage, and therapy with
either amphotericin B or ﬂuconazole (C-III). The required duration of therapy for all forms of Candida peritonitis is not
well deﬁned and should be guided by the patient’s response.
In general, 2–3 weeks of therapy seems to be required. Surgical
patients with recurrent gastrointestinal perforation are at increased risk for Candida peritonitis and may beneﬁt from prophylactic antifungal therapy (B-I).
CANDIDAL ENDOCARDITIS, PERICARDITIS,
SUPPURATIVE PHLEBITIS, AND MYOCARDITIS
Objective.
To eradicate Candida infection and prevent recurrence of infection.
Treatment options.
Intravenous amphotericin B or oral
or intravenous ﬂuconazole. Oral ﬂucytosine may be added to
amphotericin B.
Outcome.
Clearance of infection, as judged by sterilization
of the bloodstream and preservation of cardiac function.
Evidence.
All data are derived from individual case reports
and case series.
Values.
Although the available data are limited [216], combined medical and surgical therapy generally appears to be the
key for treatment of candidal endocarditis, pericarditis, and
suppurative phlebitis. As emphasized by a report of a native
valve that was not sterilized after 160 days of amphotericin B
deoxycholate therapy [217], removal of infected valves, resection of infected peripheral veins, and debridement of infected
pericardial tissue are almost always required for successful therapy [218, 219]. Suppurative phlebitis of the central veins has
responded to prolonged medical therapy with amphotericin B
[220–222]. Suppurative peripheral thrombophlebitis responds
to surgical resection of the infected vein and antifungal therapy
with amphotericin B or ﬂuconazole [223]. The utility of anticoagulation as part of such purely medical therapy is uncertain. Candidal myocarditis is usually part of the syndrome of
disseminated candidiasis, is clinically silent, and is treated as
part of the therapy of disseminated disease [224]. However,
candidal myocarditis may cause complete atrioventricular
block, necessitating placement of a pacemaker [225].
Beneﬁts, harms, and costs.
These infections are associated
with high morbidity and mortality, justifying aggressivemedical
and surgical therapy.
Key recommendations.
Both native valve and prosthetic
valve infection should be managed with surgical replacement
of the infected valve. Medical therapy with amphotericin B with
or without ﬂucytosine at maximal tolerated doses has most
often been used (B-III). Total duration of therapy should be
at least 6 weeks after surgery, but possibly much longer (CIII). Candida endocarditis has a propensity for relapse and
requires careful follow-up for at least 1 year [227]. If valve
replacement is not possible, long-term (possibly life-long) suppressive therapy with ﬂuconazole may be used (C-III) [216,
228, 229]. Successful primary therapy with ﬂuconazole [105]
and liposomal amphotericin B [230] has been described for
patients with native valve infections.
Candidal pericarditis requires surgical debridement and/or
resection, depending on the extent of the disease [231, 232].
Cardiac tamponade is possible and may require an emergency
procedure to relieve hemodynamic compromise. Prolonged
therapy with amphotericin B [219] or ﬂuconazole should be
used (C-III).
Suppurative Candida thrombophlebitis of a peripheral vein
is best managed with surgical resection of the involved vein
segment, followed by antifungal therapy for 2 weeks (B-III).
After vein resection, the general approach to this disease is
similar to that for other forms of acute hematogenous
dissemination.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/38/2/161/286280 by guest on 14 January 2025
Guidelines for Treatment of Candidiasis • CID 2004:38 (15 January) • 175
CANDIDAL MENINGITIS
Objective.
To achieve rapid clearance of the infection and
the return of normal neurological function.
Treatment options.
Intravenous amphotericin B or ﬂuconazole. Flucytosine may be added to the course of amphotericin B.
Outcomes.
Sterilization of the CSF often precedes eradication of parenchymal infection. Thus, therapy should be continued until normalization of all CSF analysis ﬁndings, normalization
of
radiological
ﬁndings, and stabilization of
neurological function.
Evidence.
Most data are based on observational reports
of use of amphotericin B deoxycholate [233, 234]. Liposomal
amphotericin B was used successfully in 5 of 6 cases of Candida
meningitis in newborn infants [235]. Because of its ability to
penetrate the blood-brain barrier, ﬂucytosine is often added to
the course of therapy [236]. Fluconazole with ﬂucytosine was
used successfully in 1 case [237].
Values.
Candida meningitis often follows candidemia in
newborn infants [234] and has a high propensity for relapse.
Untreated disease is lethal.
Beneﬁts, harms, and costs.
Because of the high morbidity
and mortality associated with this infection, very aggressive
therapy is warranted.
Key recommendations.
Amphotericin B deoxycholate
(0.7–1 mg/kg per day) plus ﬂucytosine (25 mg/kg q.i.d.) is
appropriate as initial therapy (B-III). The ﬂucytosine dose
should be adjusted to produce serum levels of 40–60 mg/mL
[173]. Very few data exist on ﬂuconazole for the treatment of
candidal meningitis—it has been used as both follow-up therapy and long-term suppressive therapy. Because of the tendency
for this disease to relapse, therapy should be administered for
a minimum of 4 weeks after resolution of all signs and symptoms associated with the infection. Treatment of Candida meningitis associated with neurosurgical procedures should also
include removal of prosthetic devices [238, 239].
CANDIDAL ENDOPHTHALMITIS
Objective.
To resolve sight-threatening lesions.
Treatment options.
Intravenous amphotericin B has been
used most often [240, 241]. Recent reports have also examined
the efﬁcacy of oral or intravenous ﬂuconazole [242]. Flucytosine has been used in combination with amphotericin B.
ABLC (4.5 mg/kg per day for 6 weeks) combined with vitrectomy produced a successful outcome in 1 case [243]. Vitrectomy may sometimes preserve sight. The role of intravitreal
antifungal therapy is unclear.
Outcome.
Preservation of sight.
Evidence.
Individual case reports and small case series have
demonstrated that amphotericin B, amphotericin B plus ﬂucytosine, and ﬂuconazole may be effective. PCR-based testing
may assist in conﬁrming the diagnosis [244, 245]. The role of
vitrectomy in therapy remains uncertain, but a recent study of
C. albicans endophthalmitis in injection drug users suggested
that the combination of early vitrectomy plus antifungal therapy was most likely to lead to a favorable outcome and preservation of vision. [246]. Of additional interest is a recent randomized study of therapy for bacterial endophthalmitis
sponsored by the National Eye Institute, in which initial pars
plana vitrectomy with use of intravitreal antibiotics followed
by a second vitreous tap and reinjection of eyes that had a poor
response to therapy after 36–60 h was compared with a strategy
of initial anterior chamber and vitreous tap and/or biopsy
[247]. For patients in this study who presented with visual
acuity of light perception only, initial vitrectomy tripled the
chance of achieving acuity of 20/40 or better. These results are
supported by anecdotal reports [248].
Values.
Early aggressive therapy is critically important.Delays in diagnosis may lead to loss of vision.
Beneﬁts, harms, and costs.
Given the devastating consequences associated with loss of sight, aggressive therapy is
warranted.
Key recommendations.
All patients with candidemia
should have at least 1 dilated retinal examination, preferably
by an ophthalmologist (A-II). The preponderance of clinical
experience of treatment is with amphotericin B, often combined
with ﬂucytosine (B-III). Recent data also support the use of
ﬂuconazole for this indication, particularly as follow-up therapy
(B-III). Use of the maximal doses appropriate for other forms
of invasive candidiasis would be appropriate to maximize penetration into the eye. Therapy should be continued until complete resolution of visible disease or convincing stabilization.
Courses of 6–12 weeks of therapy are typically required.
A diagnostic vitreal aspirate is generally recommended for
patients presenting with endophthalmitis of unknown origin.
If fungal elements are observed, some ophthalmologists instill
intravitreal amphotericin B deoxycholate therapy. The utility
of vitrectomy has not been systematically studied.Extrapolation
from a study of bacterial endophthalmitis [247] and from anecdotal experiences with Candida endophthalmitis [246] suggests that initial vitrectomy and intravitreal amphotericin B
therapy may be most appropriate for patients with substantial
vision loss.
NONGENITAL MUCOCUTANEOUS
CANDIDIASIS
Oropharyngeal and Esophageal Candidiasis
Objective.
To eliminate signs and symptoms of the disease
and to prevent recurrences.
Treatment options.
Topical azoles (clotrimazole troches),
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/38/2/161/286280 by guest on 14 January 2025
176 • CID 2004:38 (15 January) • Pappas et al.
oral azoles (ﬂuconazole, ketoconazole, or itraconazole), or oral
polyenes (such as nystatin or oral amphotericin B) are usually
effective treatments for oropharyngeal candidiasis. For refractory or recurrent infections, orally administered and absorbed
azoles (ketoconazole, ﬂuconazole, or itraconazole solution),
amphotericin B suspension, intravenous caspofungin, or intravenous amphotericin B (only for otherwise unresponsive infections) may be used.
For treatment of esophageal candidiasis, topical therapy is
ineffective. Azoles (ﬂuconazole, itraconazole solution, or voriconazole), intravenous caspofungin, and intravenous amphotericin B (necessary only for otherwise unresponsive infections)
are effective. for patients who are unable to swallow, parenteral
therapy should be used.
Outcome.
Resolution of disease without recurrence.
Evidence.
Multiple randomized prospective studies of oropharyngeal candidiasis have been performed in patients with
AIDS and patients with cancer. Most patients respond initially
to topical therapy [249–251]. In HIV-infected patients, symptomatic relapses may occur sooner with topical therapy than
with ﬂuconazole [249], and resistance may develop with either
regimen [252]. Fluconazole is superior to ketoconazole [253].
Itraconazole capsules are equivalent in efﬁcacy to ketoconazole
[254]. Itraconazole solution is better absorbed than the capsules
[255] and is comparable in efﬁcacy to ﬂuconazole [256–258].
A dosage of itraconazole solution of 2.5 mg/kg twice daily has
been recommended as suitable for treating oropharyngeal candidiasis in pediatric patients 5 years of age [96]. Topical effects
of oral solutions may be as important as effects due to absorption [259, 260].
Recurrent infections typically occur in patients with immunosuppression, especially AIDS. Long-term suppressive
therapy with ﬂuconazole is effective in the prevention of oropharyngeal candidiasis in patients with AIDS [32, 261–263]
and patients with cancer [264]. One study found that a ﬂuconazole dosage of 200 mg/day was superior to that of 400 mg/
week for prevention of symptomatic oropharyngeal disease in
HIV-infected patients [262]. Long-term suppressive therapy
with ﬂuconazole in HIV-infected patients has been shown to
reduce the incidence of invasive fungal infections but has no
effect on overall survival [32, 261–263]. In a recent large study,
long-term suppressive therapy with ﬂuconazole was compared
with episodic use of ﬂuconazole in response to symptomatic
mucosal disease. Continuous suppressive therapy reduced the
relapse rate relative to intermittent therapy and was associated
with an increased rate of development of in vitro microbiological resistance, but the frequency of clinically refractory disease was the same for the 2 study groups [263].
Oral polyenes, such as amphotericin B or nystatin, are less
effective than ﬂuconazole in preventing this infection [265]. In
a placebo-controlled study of HIV-infected patients [266], itraconazole (200 mg/day) was no more effective than placebo for
preventing development of mucosal candidiasis. However, a
second study found that itraconazole (200 mg/day) was effective as suppressive therapy for up to 6 months after a course
of oral or esophageal candidiasis [267]. Between 64% and 80%
of patients with ﬂuconazole-refractory infections will respond
to treatment with itraconazole solution [268–270]. Intravenous
caspofungin is a reasonable alternative [58]. Oral or intravenous
amphotericin B is also effective in some patients [271]. Intravenous antifungal therapy can sometimes be avoided by using
either IFN-g or GM-CSF in combination with oral antifungal
therapy [272, 273]. However, a second study found that itraconazole (200 mg/day) was effective as suppressive therapy for
up to 6 months after an episode of oral or esophageal candidiasis [267]. Itraconazole oral solution has also proven to be
effective in cases of ﬂuconazole-refractory oral candidiasis
[268–270]. Oral solution of amphotericin B has also been successfully used to treat ﬂuconazole-resistant thrush [271]. Finally,
immunomodulation
with
adjunctive
sargramostim
(rGM-CSF) [272] and INF-g [273] have been used for refractory oral candidiasis.
Much of the information on the microbiology of esophageal
candidiasis is extrapolated from studies of oropharyngeal candidiasis. However, it is known that in patients with either AIDS
or esophageal cancer, C. albicans remains the most common
etiological agent [274, 275]. The presence of oropharyngeal
candidiasis and symptoms of esophagitis (i.e., dysphagia or
odynophagia) is predictive of esophageal candidiasis [276]. A
therapeutic trial with ﬂuconazole for patients with presumed
esophageal candidiasis is a cost-effective alternative to endoscopy; most patients with esophageal candidiasis will have resolution of their symptoms within 7 days after the start of therapy [277]. Fluconazole is superior to ketoconazole, itraconazole
capsules, and ﬂucytosine for the treatment of esophageal candidiasis [278–280]. Itraconazole capsules plus ﬂucytosine are
as effective as ﬂuconazole [281]. The efﬁcacy of itraconazole
solution has been shown to comparable to that of ﬂuconazole
[282]. Up to 80% of patients with ﬂuconazole-refractory infections will respond to itraconazole solution [269, 270]. Voriconazole (200 mg b.i.d. for a median duration of 14 days) is
as efﬁcacious as ﬂuconazole (400 mg loading dose followed by
200 mg/day for a median duration of 15 days) but is associated
with a higher rate of treatment-related adverse events [46].
Voriconazole has shown success in treatment of cases of ﬂuconazole-refractory disease [48]. Intravenous amphotericin B
is also effective [283]. Caspofungin acetate has shown activity
and safety equivalent to ﬂuconazole [58–60], including good
responses in individuals with ﬂuconazole-refractory disease
[61]. In patients with advanced AIDS, recurrent infections are
common [284], and long-term suppressive therapy with ﬂuDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/38/2/161/286280 by guest on 14 January 2025
Guidelines for Treatment of Candidiasis • CID 2004:38 (15 January) • 177
conazole (100 mg/day) is effective in preventing recurrence
[285].
In cases of both oropharyngeal and esophageal candidiasis,
the vast majority of infections are caused by C. albicans, either
alone or in mixed infection [250]. However, symptomatic infections caused by C. glabrata and C. krusei alone have been
described [268]. Before the HAART era, azole-refractory infections were associated with prior use of azoles, especially oral
ﬂuconazole, and CD4 cell counts of !50 cells/mm3 [286]. A
large randomized trial performed during the HAART era found
that the rate of development of clinical ﬂuconazole resistance
was the same for individuals receiving long-term suppressive
therapy as for those receiving episodic (intermittent) therapy
[263], even though the Candida isolates recovered from the
patients receiving continuous therapy showed reduced susceptibility to ﬂuconazole. Antifungal susceptibility testing has been
shown to be predictive of clinical response to ﬂuconazole and
itraconazole [30]. In HIV-infected patients, use of HAART has
been associated with both declining rates of carriage of C. albicans and reduced frequency of symptomatic episodes of oropharyngeal candidiasis [287].
Values.
The symptoms associated with oropharyngeal and
esophageal candidiasis may reduce oral intake of food and liquids and may signiﬁcantly reduce the quality of life.
Beneﬁts, harms, and costs.
Maintenance of adequate nutrition and hydration is essential for immunocompromised
hosts. Many individuals have asymptomatic oropharyngeal colonization with Candida species, and treatment frequently does
not result in microbiological cure. Therefore, oropharyngeal
fungal cultures are of little beneﬁt. Multiple courses of therapy
or the use of suppressive therapy for recurrent infection are
major risk factors for the development of an azole-refractory
infection.
Key recommendations.
Initial episodes of oropharyngeal
candidiasis can be treated with clotrimazole troches (one 10mg troche 5 times per day) or nystatin (available as a suspension
of 100,000 U/mL [dosage, 4–6 mL q.i.d.] or as ﬂavored 200,000
U pastilles [dosage, 1 or 2 pastilles 4–5 times per day for 7–
14 days]) (B-II). Oral ﬂuconazole (100 mg/day for 7–14 days)
is as effective as—and, in some studies, superior to—topical
therapy (A-I). Itraconazole solution (200 mg/day for 7–14 days)
is as efﬁcacious as ﬂuconazole (A-I). Ketoconazole and itraconazole capsules are less effective than ﬂuconazole, because
of variable absorption (A-I).
Patients tolerate repeated episodes of oropharyngeal candidiasis without difﬁculty, especially if the episodes occur infrequently (A-I). Suppressive therapy is effective for preventing
recurrent infections (A-I). Although it does the increase the
rate of development of isolates with an increased ﬂuconazole
MIC, the use of continuous suppression (rather than episodic
or intermittent therapy in response to symptomatic relapse)
does not increase the likelihood of developing an infection that
fails to respond to ﬂuconazole (A-I).
Fluconazole-refractory oropharyngeal candidiasis will respond to oral itraconazole therapy (200 mg/day, preferably
in solution form) approximately two-thirds of the time (A-II).
An oral suspension of amphotericin B (1 mL q.i.d. of the 100
mg/mL suspension) is sometimes effective in patients who do
not respond to itraconazole (B-II). There have also been anecdotal reports of responses of refractory disease to use of
ﬂuconazole solution (used in a swish-and-swallow fashion)
[260] and to use of chewed itraconazole capsules. Intravenous
caspofungin (50 mg/day) and intravenous amphotericin B
deoxycholate (0.3 mg/kg per day) are usually effective and
may be used in patients with refractory disease (B-II). Denturerelated disease may require extensive and aggressivedisinfection
of the denture for deﬁnitive cure [288–290].
Systemic therapy is required for effective treatment of esophageal candidiasis (B-II). Although symptoms of esophageal candidiasis may be mimicked by other pathogens, a diagnostic trial
of antifungal therapy is often appropriate before performing
endoscopy (B-II). A 14–21-day course of either oral ﬂuconazole
(100 mg/day po) or itraconazole solution (200 mg/day po) is
highly effective (A-I). Ketoconazole and itraconazole capsules
are less effective than ﬂuconazole, because of variable absorption (A-I). Voriconazole is as effective as ﬂuconazole but is
associated with more adverse events (A-I). Caspofungin (50
mg/day iv) is as efﬁcacious as amphotericin B or ﬂuconazole
(A-I). Suppressive therapy may be used for patients with disabling
recurrent
infections
(A-II).
Fluconazole-refractory
esophageal candidiasis should be treated with itraconazole solution (200 mg/day po), voriconazole (200 mg b.i.d.), or
caspofungin (50 mg/day) (A-II). Intravenous amphotericin B
deoxycholate (0.3–0.7 mg/kg per day, as needed to produce a
response) may be used for patients with otherwise refractory
disease (B-II).
Antifungal susceptibility testing is not generally needed for
the management of either oropharyngeal or esophageal candidiasis, but can be useful in patients with refractory infection
(B-II). In patients with AIDS, treatment of the underlying HIV
infection with HAART is critical for preventing and managing
these infections (B-II).
Candidal Onychomycosis
Whereas onychomycosis is usually caused by a dermatophyte,
infections due to Candida species also occur [291]. Topical
agents are usually ineffective [292]. For onychomycosis, oral
griseofulvin has largely been replaced by more-effective agents,
including oral terbinaﬁne or itraconazole [293]. With respect
to Candida onychomycosis, terbinaﬁne has only limited and
unpredictable in vitro activity [294, 295] and has not demonstrated consistently good activity in clinical trials [296]. AlDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/38/2/161/286280 by guest on 14 January 2025
178 • CID 2004:38 (15 January) • Pappas et al.
Table 5.
Classiﬁcation of vaginitis.
Feature
Uncomplicateda
Complicatedb
Severity
Mild or moderate and
Severe or
Frequency
Sporadic and
Recurrent or
Organism
C. albicans and
Non-albicans species of
Candida or
Host
Normal
Abnormal (e.g., uncontrolled diabetes mellitus)
NOTE.
Patients with vaginitis can be classiﬁed as having uncomplicated
disease (90% of patients) or complicated disease (10% of patients).
a Patients with all of these features are considered to have uncomplicated
vaginitis.
b Patients with any of these features are considered to have complicated
vaginitis [315].
though the number of reported cases is small, therapy with
itraconazole does appear to be effective [297, 298]. Itraconazole
(200 mg b.i.d. for 1 week, repeated monthly for 3–4 months)
appears to be the most appropriate treatment (A-II).
Candidal Skin Infections and Paronychia
Nonhematogenous primary skin infections typically occur as
intertrigo in skin folds, especially in obese and diabetic patients.
Topical azoles and polyenes, including clotrimazole, miconazole, and nystatin, are effective. Keeping the infected area dry
is important. For paronychia, the most important intervention
is drainage.
Mammary Candidiasis
Although a clear association remains to be determined, because
of the lack of application of consistent clinical and microbiological criteria, nipple or breast pain in nursing mothers has
been linked to the presence of C. albicans [299]. Nursing worsens or precipitates the pain. Classical ﬁndings of mastitis are
absent, as is fever, and the ﬁndings of a local physical examination are often unimpressive [300]. The infant may or may
not have signs of mucosal or cutaneous candidiasis. Microbiological studies have found both bacteria [300, 301] and C.
albicans [300], with bacteria appearing to predominate. The
true cause of the pain associated with this syndrome is unclear,
but treatment of the mother and the infant with an antifungal
agent has produced relief, according to some reports [302, 303].
Optimal diagnostic criteria and management strategies are not
certain, but both topical nystatin and oral ﬂuconazole are safe
for infants [304–306] and could be considered as therapy for
mother and child if the presentation is strongly suggestive of
candidiasis.
Chronic Mucocutaneous Candidiasis
The persistent immunological defect associated with chronic
mucocutaneous candidiasis requires a long-term approach that
is analogous to that used in patients with AIDS and rapidly
relapsing oropharyngeal candidiasis [307]. Systemic therapy is
needed, and all of the azole antifungal agents (ketoconazole,
ﬂuconazole, and itraconazole) have been used successfully [307,
308]. The required dosages are similar to those used for other
forms of mucocutaneous candidiasis. As with HIV-infected patients, development of resistance to these agents has also been
described [309, 310].
GENITAL CANDIDIASIS
Objective.
To achieve rapid and complete relief of signs
and symptoms of vulvovaginal inﬂammation, along with prevention of future recurrences.
Treatment options.
Topical agents including azoles (all are
used for 1–7 days depending on risk classiﬁcation: over-thecounter [OTC] clotrimazole, OTC butoconazole, OTC miconazole, OTC tioconazole, terconazole), nystatin [100,000 U per
day for 7–14 days], oral azoles (ketoconazole [400 mg b.i.d.
for 5 days], which is not approved in the United States); itraconazole [200 mg b.i.d. for 1 day, or 200 mg per day for 3
days], which is not approved in the United States; and ﬂuconazole [150 mg]) [311]. Boric acid administered vaginally (600mg gelatin capsule, once per day for 14 days) is also effective
[312].
Outcomes.
Resolution of signs and symptoms of vaginitis
48–72 h after initiation of therapy, and mycological cure 4–7
days after initiation of therapy.
Evidence.
Multiple double-blind randomized studies [311,
313, 314].
Values.
Highly effective relief of symptoms that are associated with substantial morbidity can be achieved promptly
with current therapies.
Beneﬁts, harms, and costs.
Self-diagnosis of yeast vaginitis
is unreliable. Incorrect diagnosis results in overuse of topical
antifungal agents, with subsequent risk of contact and irritant
vulvar dermatitis.
Key recommendations.
Vaginal candidiasis may be classiﬁed into complicated and uncomplicated forms (table 5)
[315]. Uncomplicated vaginitis is seen in 90% of patients and
responds readily to short-course oral or topical therapy with
any of the therapies listed above, including the single-dose regimens (A-I). In contrast, the complicated vaginitis seen in
∼10% of patients requires antimycotic therapy for 7 days,
either daily as topical therapy or as two 150-mg doses of ﬂuconazole administered 72 h apart [314] (A-I). Azole therapy is
unreliable for non-albicans species of Candida (B-III). Infections with C. glabrata, C. krusei [316], and the other nonalbicans species frequently respond to topical boric acid (600
mg/day for 14 days (B-II) or topical ﬂucytosine (B-II). Azoleresistant C. albicans infections are extremely rare [317].
Recurrent vaginitis is usually due to azole-susceptible C. alDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/38/2/161/286280 by guest on 14 January 2025
Guidelines for Treatment of Candidiasis • CID 2004:38 (15 January) • 179
bicans. After control of causal factors (e.g., uncontrolled diabetes), induction therapy with 2 weeks of a topical or oral azole
should be followed by a maintenance regimen for 6 months.
Suitable maintenance regimens include ﬂuconazole (150 mg po
every week) [318], ketoconazole (100 mg per day) [319], itraconazole (100 mg q.o.d.) or daily therapy with any topical azole
(A-I). Chronic use of ﬂuconazole in HIV-infected women has
been associated with increased vaginal carriage of non-albicans
species of Candida [320], but the signiﬁcance of this observation is uncertain.
PROPHYLAXIS
HIV-Infected Patients
See the subsection Oropharyngeal and Esophageal Candidiasis,
above.
Neutropenic Patients
Objective.
To prevent development of invasive fungal infections during periods of risk.
Treatment options.
Intravenous amphotericin B, intravenous or oral ﬂuconazole, intravenous or oral itraconazole,
or intravenous micafungin (under investigation; see the subsection Key recommendations, below)
Outcomes.
Prevention of onset of signs and symptoms of
invasive candidiasis.
Evidence.
Randomized, prospective, placebo-controlled
trials have shown that systemically active antifungal agents can
reduce the rate of development of superﬁcial and invasive Candida infections in high-risk patients [321]. The best data have
compared the efﬁcacy of ﬂuconazole (400 mg/day) with that
of placebo in bone-marrow transplant recipients [322, 323]
and/or patients receiving intensive cytotoxic therapy for acute
leukemia [324]. Itraconazole (2.5 mg/kg q12h po) was at least
as effective overall as ﬂuconazole (100 mg/day po) and better
for prevention of aspergillosis when used as prophylaxis in
patients undergoing chemotherapy or bone marrow transplantation for hematological malignancy [325]. Micafungin (50 mg/
day iv during the period of neutropenia) reduced the use of
empirical amphotericin B, relative to that of ﬂuconazole (400
mg/day), as prophylaxis during the neutropenic phase in bone
marrow transplant recipients and was associated with a trend
toward lower rates of aspergillosis in micafungin-treated patients [69]. Although continuing prophylaxis for the minimum
duration in which the patient is at risk for neutropenia seems
appropriate, prophylaxis in bone marrow transplant recipients
beyond the period of engraftment was, in one large randomized
placebo-controlled study, associated with a signiﬁcant mortality beneﬁt [322, 326]. The utility of other potentially active
agents (e.g., amphotericin B) may be limited by toxicity or
bioavailability.
Values.
Prevention of invasive fungal infection lowers
morbidity and infection-related mortality [321]. Observed effects on overall mortality have either been none [323] or beneﬁcial [322], but these 2 studies did demonstrate a reduction
in the rate of fungus-associated deaths.
Beneﬁts, harms, and costs.
Inappropriate use of prophylaxis for low-risk patient populations could apply epidemiological pressure that could select for resistant organisms.
Key recommendations.
Fluconazole (400 mg/day) or itraconazole solution (2.5 mg/kg q12h po during the period of risk
for neutropenia) are appropriate therapies for patients who are
at signiﬁcant risk for invasive candidiasis (A-I). Although not
licensed at the time of this writing, micafungin demonstrated
favorable activity, on the basis of results in the recently reported
comparative trial [69], and may become an option for antifungal prophylaxis in neutropenic patients. Such patient groups
might include patients receiving standard chemotherapy for
acute myelogenous leukemia, allogeneic bone marrow transplants, or high-risk autologous bone marrow transplants. However, in this context, it is important to understand that, among
these populations, chemotherapy or bone marrow transplantation protocols do not all produce equivalent risk and that
local experience with particular chemotherapy and cytokine
regimens should be used to determine the relevance of prophylaxis [327–329]. The optimal duration of prophylaxis is not
known but should include the period of risk for neutropenia
at a minimum.
Solid-Organ Transplant Recipients
Objective.
To prevent development of invasive fungal infections during periods of risk.
Treatment options.
Intravenous amphotericin B or intravenous or oral ﬂuconazole.
Outcomes.
Prevention of onset of signs and symptoms of
invasive candidiasis.
Evidence.
Patients undergoing liver transplantation who
have 2 key risk factors (i.e., retransplantation, creatinine level
of 12.0 mg/dL, choledochojejunostomy, intraoperative use of
40 units of blood products, and fungal colonization detected
2 days previous to and 3 days after transplantation) have
been identiﬁed as being at high risk for invasive fungal infections, especially invasive candidiasis [330–332]. Conversely, patients without these risk factors are at low risk of invasive
candidiasis [333]. Amphotericin B deoxycholate (10–20 mg/
day in a retrospective observational study [334]), liposomal
amphotericin B (1 mg/kg per day in a prospective randomized
study vs. placebo [335]), and ﬂuconazole (100 mg/day in a
retrospective observational study [336], 100 mg/day in a prospective randomized study vs. nystatin [337], and 400 mg/day
in a prospective randomized study vs. placebo [338]) reduced
or trended towards reducing rates of invasive fungal infections.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/38/2/161/286280 by guest on 14 January 2025
180 • CID 2004:38 (15 January) • Pappas et al.
The largest and most convincing study was by Winston et al.
[338], in which ﬂuconazole (400 mg/day) reduced rates of fungal infections (including superﬁcial infections) in a series of
unselected patients from 23% to 6% (
).
P ! .001
The risk for candidiasis among patients who received a pancreas transplant is probably less than that for those who received
a liver transplant. A recent retrospective review of 445 consecutive pancreas transplant recipients revealed a 6% frequency of
intra-abdominal fungal infection in those who received ﬂuconazole prophylaxis (400 mg/day) for 7 days after transplantation, compared with 10% for those who did not received
prophylaxis [339]. There also was signiﬁcant improvement in
1-year graft survival rate and overall survival among patients
who had no infection. Prospective and case-controlled studies
will further help to delineate the population of patients at high
risk for invasive candidiasis and the potential beneﬁts of ﬂuconazole prophylaxis.
Data from a small series of patients undergoing small-bowel
transplantation documented 20 invasive fungal infections (16
of which were due to Candida species) among 29 transplant
recipients [340], which suggests a potential role for prophylaxis.
The risk of invasive candidiasis after transplantation of other
solid organs appears to be too low to warrant systemic prophylaxis [341].
Value.
Prevention of the signiﬁcant morbidity associated
with invasive candidiasis is warranted.
Beneﬁts, harms, and costs.
Injudicious use of prophylaxis
for patients at low risk might lead to selection of resistant
organisms.
Key recommendations.
High-risk recipients of liver transplants should receive prophylactic antifungal therapy during
the early postoperative period (A-I).
Patients in ICUs and Other Care Settings
Objective.
To prevent development of invasive fungal infections during periods of risk.
Treatment options.
Intravenous amphotericin B or intravenous or oral ﬂuconazole.
Outcomes.
Prevention of onset of signs and symptoms of
invasive candidiasis.
Evidence.
This topic has been extensively reviewed, and
prophylaxis may be warranted in hospital units that show very
high rates of disease despite use of aggressive infection-control
procedures [342]. Oral ﬂuconazole (400 mg/day) produced a
trend toward decreased rates of invasive candidiasis in selected
adult patients in the surgical ICU with an expected ICU stay
of at least 3 days [343]. In preterm infants with birth weights
of !1000 g, 6 weeks of ﬂuconazole therapy (3 mg/kg iv every
third day during the ﬁrst 2 weeks of life, every other day during
the third and fourth weeks of life, and every day during the
ﬁfth and sixth weeks of life) reduced the rate of invasive candidiasis from 20% to 0% (
) [344]. Fluconazole proP p .008
phylaxis (400 mg/day) reduced the rate of candidal peritonitis
in patients with refractory gastrointestinal perforation [214].
Values.
Prevention of the signiﬁcant morbidity associated
with invasive candidiasis is warranted. Candidemia is associated
with signiﬁcant costs [138].
Beneﬁts, harms, and costs.
Injudicious use of prophylaxis
in low-risk hospital units where the risk of candidiasis is low
might lead to selection of resistant organisms.
Key recommendations.
Knowledge about this class of infections is evolving. The primary data showing utility of prophylaxis are from studies at single centers with high baseline
rates of infections. The broader applicability of these rules in
other ICUs remains a subject of signiﬁcant debate. Institutions
where high rates of invasive candidiasis in the adult or neonatal
ICU persist despite standard infection-control procedurescould
consider ﬂuconazole prophylaxis for carefully selected patients
in these care areas (A-I).
DISCLOSURE OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS OR
RELATIONSHIPS
Peter G. Pappas has received grant support from Merck, Fujisawa, Pﬁzer, Shering-Plough, Enzon, and Vicuron. He has
been a speaker for Merck, Fujisawa, Enzon, and Pﬁzer and has
served as a consultant for Merck and Schering-Plough. John
H. Rex is employed full time with AstraZenecaPharmaceuticals.
Jack D. Sobel has received grant support from 3M, Pﬁzer, and
Johnson & Johnson. Scott G. Filler has received grant support
from Pﬁzer, Glaxo-Smith Kline, Cubist, and Merck He has been
a speaker for Merck, Pﬁzer, and 3M and has served as a consultant for Merck. William E. Dismukes has received grant
support from Fujisawa and Merck. He has been a speaker for
Pﬁzer and Enzon and has served as a consultant for Fujisawa,
Pﬁzer, Vicuron, and Bristol-Myers Squibb. Thomas J. Walsh
has received grant support from Fujisawa and Merck. John E.
Edwards has served as a consultant for Pﬁzer and Merck.
Acknowledgments
We wish to thank Dr. Andreas Groll (National Cancer Institute) and Dr. Scott Whitcupp (National Eye Institute), for
their review of selected sections of the ﬁrst version of these
guidelines, and Dr. Luis Ostrosky-Zeichner, for his review of
selected sections of this, the second version of these guidelines.
