387
□CASEREPORT □
An Elderly Case of Type 2 Diabetes which Developed in
Association with Oral and Esophageal Candidiasis
Hirofumi Takasawa, Yoshihiko Takahashi, Makiko Abe, Keiichiro Osame, Shigeru Watanabe,
Tomoko Hisatake, Kazuki Yasuda, Yasushi Kaburagi, Hiroshi Kajio and Mitsuhiko Noda
Abstract
A 75-year-old woman who had been healthy except for mild glycemia and lipidemia discovered three and
a half months before admission experienced severe dysphagia secondary to oral and esophageal candidiasis.
She eventually developed diabetic hyperosmolar syndrome and ketoacidosis. Since anti-GAD antibody was
negative and her diabetes was controlled with a moderate dose of insulin, we made a diagnosis of type 2 diabetes. Her only risk factors for candidiasis were hyperglycemia, age, and continuous denture use. The fact
that her diabetes developed in association with oral candidiasis supports the hypothesis that there is a bidirectional interrelationship between diabetes and oral infection.
Key words: denture, candidiasis, hyperosmolar syndrome, ketoacidosis
(DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.46.1898)
Introduction
Candidiasis is one of the most common infections associated with diabetes. Most of the cases of diabetes-related
candidiasis reported in Japan have been associated with
chronic poor glycemic control (usually for years) and secondary factors such as 1) use of immunosuppressants, 2) malignant disease, 3) administration of intravenous hyperalimentation, and 4) antibiotic use. Below we report a case of
newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes accompanied by severe oral
candidiasis and esophageal candidiasis (OC and EC, respectively), in which there was an evidence that the diabetes and
clinically evident Candida infection both developed within a
short interval in the absence of any of the well-known secondary factors mentioned above.
Case Report
The patient was a 75-year-old woman who was found to
have mild glycemia (fasting plasma glucose 117 mg/dl),
mildly elevated hemoglobin A1c level (6.0%), and moderate
lipidemia (total cholesterol 234 mg/dl, and fasting triglyceride 329 mg/dl) during an annual health checkup in early
January 2005, but who was otherwise healthy. Her height
was 151 cm, and body weight was 47 kg at the time of the
checkup. She never smoked, rarely drank alcohol, and had
no noteworthy medical history except for cataract surgery at
70 years of age and a cutaneous herpes zoster infection at
65 years of age. Her father died of laryngeal cancer, but
there was no other family history of major illness. Notably,
she had hardly any teeth and wore dentures almost constantly.
In early April 2005, she started a series of domestic trips
and began to experience fatigue, thirst, and dysphagia during her trips. She had lost 5 kg in one week. In mid-April,
her dysphagia became so severe that she could not eat solid
food and could only drink water. A few days later, she went
to a clinic by herself, and the physician noted very dry skin,
a white coating in her mouth, fissured tongue, and signs of
extreme exhaustion. Esophageal cancer was suspected. Gastric fiberscopy was performed the next day, and glucose was
infused (approximately 16 g of glucose) during the examination. The examination revealed severe candidiasis of oral
mucosa, larynx, and entire esophagus. The diagnosis of candidiasis was confirmed by staining esophageal specimens,
and amphotericin B syrup was prescribed. The next evening,
the patient was transferred to our hospital because she was
confused and had a gait disturbance.
The patient soon lapsed into hypovolemic shock, and a
Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, International Medical Center of Japan, Tokyo
Received for publication June 20, 2006; Accepted for publication November 14, 2006
Correspondence to Dr. Mitsuhiko Noda, mnoda@imcj.hosp.go.jp
DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.46.1898
388
Figure 1. Clinical Course. The dysphagia improved and 
the patient resumed oral feeding prior to administration of 
fluconazole. However, the CRP level increased on hospital 
day 5, and the antifungal therapy was started. After day 34, 
she was referred to another hospital for follow-up. GF: gastric fiberscopy; DIV: drip infusion of regular insulin; R+N: 
three injections of regular insulin daily plus bedtime NPH insulin injection.
Table 1. Summary of the Laboratory Findings
drip infusion was started immediately. Her body temperature
was 36.5℃, and physical examination revealed a white coating of the oral cavity and severe dehydration. Her chest and
heart were normal to auscultation, and no masses were
found in the abdomen. We failed to notice the condition of
her dentures because of the emergency admission.
Laboratory data showed severe hyperglycemia (plasma
glucose 1,369 mg/dl), an elevated HbA1c level (10.6%), and
renal dysfunction (Table 1). Serum lactate was mildly increased and the anion gap was very high (32.4 mEq/l).
There was moderate acidemia (pH=7.196), and plasma osmotic pressure deduced from serum sodium, potassium,
BUN, and glucose was very high (398 mOsm/l). Based on
these findings, a diagnosis of diabetic hyperosmolar syndrome complicated by ketoacidosis was made.
Antinuclear antibody and rheumatoid factor were negative, and the immunoglobulin G level was within the normal
range. A chest X-ray and abdominal CT scan did not show
any abnormal findings, such as malignant disease or an abscess. An eye examination showed no evidence of diabetic
retinopathy or fungal endophthalmitis, and Candida septicemia was ruled out by the blood culture and Candida antigen
test. Anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) antibody was
negative. Urinary C-peptide excretion was impaired at first
(8.3 μg/day), but after intensive insulin therapy it recovered
to 33.1 μg/day (Table 1). The dysphagia improved even after
discontinuation of amphotericin B syrup, and it was possible
to resume oral feeding at the end of the month. However,
the C-reactive protein value rose on day 5 (Fig. 1), and fluconazole was administered orally until the middle of the
next month. Since glycemic control had improved, bedtime
insulin was discontinued, and the patient was discharged on
three injections of regular insulin a day (6 units before
breakfast and 4 units each before lunch and dinner).
Her final visit to our hospital was on day 34, and she was
referred to another local hospital at that time. Her diabetes
has been well controlled with twice daily injections of a
mixed type of insulin (30% of insulin aspart and 70% of insulin aspart protamine suspension), 8 units before breakfast
and 4 units before dinner, and her hemoglobin A1c level
was 6.5% at the 9-month follow-up examination. There have
been no recurrences of the OC or EC. Since 1) anti-GAD
antibody was not detected, 2) the urinary C-peptide excretion had recovered to a level that showed her diabetes was
not insulin dependent, and 3) her diabetes control was stable
on a moderate dose of insulin, the final diagnosis was type
2 diabetes.
Discussion
We have summarized the cases of glycemia-related OC
and EC reported in Japan from 1995 to 2004 in Table 2. Except for case 9, in which there was impaired glucose tolerance (IGT), and case 10, in which diabetes was newly diagnosed, the OC and/or EC occurred in patients with longterm hyperglycemia (more than 2 years) or with repeated
episodes of ketoacidosis (case 2 and case 7). Diabetes is
considered as a risk factor for EC because of 1) impaired
immunity and 2) stasis of esophageal contents as a manifestation of neuropathy (1). Although an oral glucose tolerance
test was not performed in early January 2005 and latent diaDOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.46.1898
389
Table 2. Summary of Case Reports of Diabetes-related 
Oral and/or Esophageal Candidiasis in Japan From 1995 to 
2004
betes was not completely ruled out at that time, the fasting
plasma glucose level and hemoglobin A1c value in the present case indicated that the duration of clinically overt diabetes was less than three and a half months, a duration that
was unlikely to have been long enough to have caused
chronic immune dysfunction or diabetic neuropathy.
OC in diabetes has recently been reviewed (2), and the
evidence available is still limited. In several papers to address the correlation between OC and diabetes, we have had
a deep interest in the hypothesis regarding the interrelationship between diabetes and oral infection that states that diabetes will trigger oral infection, and conversely that oral infection can promote insulin resistance and is also a risk factor for developing diabetes (3). Continuous denture wearing
has been suggested to be a risk for OC (2), and our patient
wore dentures almost all the time. We speculate that 1) her
series of trips may have led to insufficient denture cleaning
and increased contamination of her dentures, which was
likely to have promoted Candida growth; 2) the clinical
Candida infection may have promoted insulin resistance and
worsened her diabetes; and 3) an increased glucose level in
her saliva may have further encouraged Candida growth.
This vicious cycle would contribute to the progression of
type 2 diabetes and spread of candidiasis. Consistent with
this speculation, a recent report described the case of an elderly Japanese woman whose only risk factors for OC were
contaminated dentures and impaired glucose tolerance (IGT)
(4). Dysphagia, especially in our aged patient, would easily
lead to deterioration of nutritional status and dehydration,
and that would have further contributed to insulin resistance
and the spread of the Candida infection, and consequently,
to extreme hyperglycemia. It was also likely that the patient
consumed a substantial volume of glucose-containing beverages, which may have increased the glycemia and given rise
to glucotoxicity, which causes pancreatic beta cell failure
(5). It is not uncommon for type 2 diabetes to become complicated by ketoacidosis as a result of relative insulin deficiency, an increase in counterregulatory hormones, and severe dehydration (6).
Biological analyses have revealed mechanisms by which
hyperglycemia triggers candidiasis specifically to diabetic
patients; 1) neutrophil dysfunction, 2) impaired opsonization
because of glucose binding to the third component of complement, and 3) virulence of the pathogens that enables
them to grow rapidly in the hyperglycemic environment (7).
Candida albicans, the most frequently detected Candida
species in oral mucosa specimens from diabetic patients (8,
9), contains a glucose-inducible protein that inhibits phagocytosis (7). Thus, apart from the neutrophil dysfunction, hyperglycemia itself may be a risk factor for candidiasis. In
fact, a middle-aged Japanese man who had repeated OC and
EC was found to have no abnormalities of neutrophil function or lymphocyte proliferation, and it is noteworthy that
his symptoms were not sufficiently controlled by antifungal
drugs alone, but only in combination with insulin therapy
(Table 2 case 6, ref. 10).
In light of the current review in odontology, however,
whether or not hyperglycemia is an independent factor for
OC remains a matter of controversy (2). Recent reports indicate that oral Candida carriage is not directly associated
with age, denture wearing, gender, or glycemic control (8,
9). Even though glycemic control is not independently correlated with the Candida carriage, cases reported in Japan
suggest a relationship between clinically evident OC and
diabetes (Table 2 and this paper). The accumulation of multiple risk factors including hyperglycemia, denture wearing,
improper tooth brushing, and aging may trigger OC and EC.
Many reports suggest that type 2 diabetes is a risk factor
for periodontal disease (ref.11, for example), and conversely,
a randomized controlled trial of the effectiveness of treatment of periodontal disease on glycemic control indicated
that effective treatment of periodontal infection with doxycycline is associated with a reduction in the HbA1c level
(12). Also, a Japanese study has indicated that poor glycemic control is associated with poor periodontal status, such
as increased Candida on the tongue and that the oral microbial flora and salivary function improve after controlling
fasting glycemia (13). Thus, there is increasing evidence for
a bidirectional interrelationship between oral health and diabetes. Oral infection is common in the elderly, and poor
dental health combined with systemic diseases such as diabetes may be associated with increased mortality (14). The
present patient developed severe hyperglycemia and dehydration, and consequently a life-threatening diabetic complication. An oral hygiene program has shown significant improvement in colonization of the oral mucosa and dentures
by Candida (15). Greater attention should be paid to oral
health as a means of preventing serious systemic disease in
the elderly.
We thank Dr M. Kishimoto for critical reading of this manuscript.
DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.46.1898
390
